None

Every year millions of people suffer from bouts of
vomiting and diarrhea each year that they blame on
“something I ate.” These people are generally correct.
Each year in the United States, one to two bouts of diar-
rheal illness occur in every adult. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that there are
from six to 33 million cases of food poisoning in the Unit-
ed States annually. Many cases are mild and pass so rapid-
ly that they are never diagnosed. Occasionally a severe
outbreak creates a newsworthy public health hazard.
Classical food poisoning, sometimes incorrectly
called ptomaine poisoning, is caused by a variety of dif-
ferent bacteria. The most common are Salmonella,
Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli O157:H7 or
other E. coli strains,
Shigella,
and Clostridium
botulinum. Each has a slightly different incubation peri-
od and duration, but all except C. botulinum cause
inflammation of the intestines and diarrhea. Sometimes
food poisoning is called bacterial gastroenteritis or
infectious diarrhea. Food and water can also be contami-
nated by viruses (such as the Norwalk agent that causes
diarrhea and the viruses of hepatitis A and E), environ-
mental toxins (heavy metals), and poisons produced
within the food itself (mushroom poisoning or fish and
shellfish poisoning).
Careless food handling during the trip from farm to
table creates conditions for the growth of bacteria that
make people sick. Vegetables that are eaten raw, such as let-
tuce, may be contaminated by bacteria in soil, water, and
dust during washing and packing. Home canned and com-
mercially canned food may be improperly processed at too
low a temperature or for too short a time to kill the bacteria.
Raw meats carry many food-borne bacterial dis-
eases. The United States Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) estimates that 60% or more of raw poultry sold at
retail carry some disease-causing bacteria. Other raw
meat products and eggs are contaminated to a lesser
degree. Thorough cooking kills the bacteria and makes
the food harmless. However, properly cooked food can
become re-contaminated if it comes in contact with
plates, cutting boards, countertops, or utensils that were
used with raw meat and not cleaned and sanitized.
Cooked foods can also be contaminated after cook-
ing by bacteria carried by food handlers or from bacteria
in the environment. It is estimated that 50% of healthy
people have the bacteria Staphylococcus aureus in their
nasal passages and throat, and on their skin and hair.
Rubbing a runny nose, then touching food can introduce
the bacteria into cooked food. Bacteria flourish at room
temperature, and will rapidly grow into quantities capa-
ble of making people sick. To prevent this growth, food
must be kept hot or cold, but never just warm.
Although the food supply in the United States is
probably the safest in the world, anyone can get food
poisoning. Serious outbreaks are rare. When they occur,
the very young, the very old, and those with immune sys-
tem weaknesses have the most severe and life-threaten-
ing cases. For example, this group is 20 times more like-
ly to become infected with the Salmonella bacteria than
the general population.
Travel outside the United States to countries where
less attention is paid to sanitation, water purification, and
good food handling practices increases the chances that a
person will get food poisoning. People living in institu-
tions such as nursing homes are also more likely to get
food poisoning.