None

Dysbiosis—The condition that results when the
natural flora of the gut are thrown out of balance,
such as when antibiotics are taken.
Peristalsis—The natural wave-like action of a
healthy bowel that transports matter from one end
of the bowel to the other.
Probiotics—Supplements of beneficial microor-
ganisms that normally colonize the gut.
Toxemia—Poisoning of the blood.
have been in the colon for years. Some therapists com-
ment that it looks like aging rubber.
During the treatment, the therapist will gently massage
the patient’s abdomen to help dislodge impacted fecal mat-
ter. In addition to massage, sometimes acupressure,
reflexology, or lymphatic drainage techniques may be used
to loosen deposits and stimulate the bowel. It is important
that the right amount of water is used, as too much will
cause discomfort and too little will be ineffective. If cor-
rectly done, colonic irrigation is not painful at all and some
patients claim to sleep through their treatment.
Sanitation is vital to this process. The tubes and
speculums used are generally disposable, but other parts
of the machine, such as the viewing tube, must be steril-
ized after each patient.
Normally, a series of treatments will be required to
achieve desired results regarding the elimination of
impacted, decaying matter, and restoration of bowel reg-
ularity. Initially, only gas and recent fecal matter may be
expelled. The residue attached to the colon wall is usual-
ly the result of years of neglect, and therapists say that
one cannot expect complete relief in only one session.
Impacted fecal matter can cause an imbalance of the
natural organisms that normally populate the bowel, caus-
ing what is known as dysbiosis. Under ideal conditions,
the bowel is populated by a variety of naturally occurring
organisms. It seems that the enzymes occurring in fresh
fruit and vegetables encourage these beneficial organ-
isms. One of the results of eating processed denatured
foods is that this natural balance is upset, and food may
begin to rot in the bowel instead of being processed.
Decomposing matter can cause a toxic condition and
may lead to many health problems, as constipation caus-
es backed up pollution of the body cells. The process of
repair and elimination of wastes enters a downward spi-
ral which at best will cause fatigue, lack of energy and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
855