Diabetes becomes increasingly likely as a person with CF ages. Scarring of the pancreas slowly destroys those pancreatic cells which produce insulin, producing type I, or insulin-dependent diabetes. Gall stones affect approximately 10% of adults with CF. Liver problems are less common, but can be caused by the buildup of fat within the liver. Complications of liver enlargement may include internal hemorrhaging, abdomi- nal fluid (ascites), spleen enlargement, and liver failure. Other gastrointestinal symptoms can include a pro- lapsed rectum, in which part of the rectal lining protrudes through the anus; intestinal obstruction; and rarely, intussusception, in which part of the intestinal tube slips over an adjoining part, cutting off blood supply. Somewhat less than 10% of people with CF do not have gastrointestinal symptoms. Most of these people do not have the delta-F508 mutation, but rather a different one, which presumably allows at least some of their CFTR proteins to function normally in the pancreas. RESPIRATORY TRACT. The respiratory tract includes the nose, the throat, the trachea (or windpipe), the bronchi (which branch off from the trachea within each lung), the smaller bronchioles, and the blind sacs called alveoli, in which gas exchange takes place between air and blood. Swelling of the sinuses within the nose is common in people with CF. This usually shows up on x-ray, and may aid the diagnosis of CF. However, this swelling, called pansinusitis, rarely causes problems, and does not usually require treatment. Nasal polyps, or growths, affect about one in five people with CF. These growths are not cancerous, and do not require removal unless they become annoying. While nasal polyps appear in older people without CF, especially those with allergies, they are rare in children without CF. The lungs are the site of the most life-threatening effects of CF. The production of a thick, sticky mucus increases the likelihood of infection, decreases the abil- ity to protect against infection, causes inflammation and swelling, decreases the functional capacity of the lungs, and may lead to emphysema. People with CF will live with chronic populations of bacteria in their lungs, and lung infection is the major cause of death for those with CF. The bronchioles and bronchi normally produce a thin, clear mucus that traps foreign particles including bacteria and viruses. Tiny hair-like projections on the surface of these passageways slowly sweep the mucus along, out of the lungs and up the trachea to the back of the throat, where it may be swallowed or coughed up. This “mucociliary escalator” is one of the principal defenses against lung infection. The thickened mucus of CF prevents easy movement out of the lungs, and increases the irritation and inflam- mation of lung tissue. This inflammation swells the pas- sageways, partially closing them down, further hamper- ing the movement of mucus. A person with CF is likely to cough more frequently and more vigorously as the lungs attempt to clean themselves out. At the same time, infection becomes more likely since the mucus is a rich