Cholestasis is caused by obstruction within the liver
(intrahepatic) or outside the liver (extrahepatic). The
obstruction causes bile salts, the bile pigment bilirubin,
and fats (lipids) to accumulate in the blood stream
instead of being eliminated normally.
Intrahepatic cholestasis is characterized by wide-
spread blockage of small ducts or by disorders, such as
hepatitis, that impair the body’s ability to eliminate bile.
Extrahepatic cholestasis can occur as a side effect of
many medications. It can also occur as a complication of
surgery, serious injury, tissue-destroying infection, or
intravenous feeding. Extrahepatic cholestasis can be
caused by conditions such as tumors and gallstones that
block the flow of bile from the gallbladder to the first
part of the small intestine (duodenum).
Pregnancy increases the sensitivity of the bile ducts
to estrogen, and cholestasis often develops during the sec-
ond and third trimesters of pregnancy. This condition is
the second most common cause of jaundice during preg-
nancy, but generalized itching (pruritus gravidarum) is
the only symptom most women experience. Cholestasis
of pregnancy tends to run in families. Symptoms usually
disappear within two to four weeks after the baby’s birth
but may reappear if the woman becomes pregnant again.
A similar condition affects some women who take
birth-control pills. Symptoms disappear after the woman
stops using oral contraceptives. This condition does not
lead to chronic liver disease. A woman who develops
cholestasis from either of these causes (pregnancy or
birth control hormones) has an increased risk of develop-
ing cholestasis from the other.
Benign familial recurrent cholestasis is a rare condi-
tion characterized by brief, repeated episodes of itching
and jaundice. Symptoms often disappear. This condition
does not cause cirrhosis.
Drug-induced cholestasis may be a complication of
chemotherapy or other medications. The two major types
of drug-induced cholestasis are direct toxic injury and
reactions unique to an individual (idiosyncratic reactions).
In direct toxic injury, the severity of symptoms parallels
the amount of medication involved. This condition:
• develops a short time after treatment begins
• follows a predictable pattern
• usually causes liver damage
Direct toxic reactions develop in 1% of all patients
who take chlorpromazine (Thorazine), a tranquilizer and
antinausea drug. Idiosyncratic reactions may occur at the
onset of treatment or at a later time. Allergic responses
are varied and are not related to the amount of medica-
tion being taken.

None