None

Formerly called EDS type IV, EDS vascular type is
the most severe form. The connective tissue in the
intestines, arteries, uterus, and other hollow organs may
be unusually weak, leading to organ or blood vessel rup-
ture. Such ruptures are most likely between ages 20 and
40, although they can occur any time, and may be life-
threatening.
There is a classic facial appearance associated with
EDS vascular type. Affected individuals tend to have
large eyes, a thin pinched nose, thin lips, and a slim body.
The skin is thin and translucent, with veins dramatically
visible, particularly across the chest.
The large joints have normal stability, but small
joints in the hands and feet are loose, showing hyperex-
tensibility. The skin bruises easily. Other complications
may include collapsed lungs, premature aging of the skin
on the hands and feet, and ruptured arteries and veins.
After surgery there tends to be poor wound healing, a
complication that tends to be frequent and severe. Preg-
nancy also carries the risk complications. During and
after pregnancy there is an increased risk of the uterus
rupturing and of arterial bleeding. Due to the severe com-
plications associated with EDS type IV, death usually
occurs before the fifth decade. A study of 419 individuals
with EDS vascular type, completed in 2000, found that
the median survival rate was 48 years, with a range of six
to 73 years. EDS vascular type is inherited in an autoso-
mal dominant manner.
There are four major clinical diagnostic criteria for
EDS vascular type. These include thin translucent skin,
arterial/intestinal/uterine fragility or rupture, extensive
bruising, and characteristic facial appearance. EDS vascu-
lar type is caused by a change in the gene COL3A1,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1138
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
which codes for one of the collagen chains used to build
Collage type III. Laboratory testing is available for this
form of EDS. A skin biopsy may be used to demonstrate
the structurally abnormal collagen. This type of biochem-
ical test identifies more than 95% of individuals with EDS
vascular type. Laboratory testing is recommended for
individuals with two or more of the major criteria.
DNA analysis may als be used to identify the change
within the COL3A1 gene. This information may be help-
ful for genetic counseling purposes. Prenatal testing is
available for pregnancies in which an affected parent has
been identified and their DNA mutation is known or their
biochemical defect has been demonstrated.