None

Most cases of acute diarrhea never need diagnosis or
treatment, as many are mild and produce few problems.
But patients with fever over 102°F (38.9°C), signs of
dehydration, bloody bowel movements, severe abdomi-
nal pain, known immune disease, or prior use of antibi-
otics need prompt medical evaluation.
When diagnostic studies are needed, the most use-
ful are stool culture and examination for parasites;
however these are often negative and a cause cannot be
found in a large number of patients. The earlier cul-
tures are performed, the greater the chance of obtain-
ing a positive result. For those with a history of antibi-
otic use in the preceding two months, stool samples
need to be examined for the toxins that cause antibiot-
ic-associated colitis. Tests are also available to check
stool samples for microscopic amounts of blood and
for cells that indicate severe inflammation of the colon.
Examination with an endoscope is sometimes helpful
in determining severity and extent of inflammation.
Tests to check changes in blood chemistry (potassium,
magnesium, etc.) and a complete blood count (CBC)
are also often performed.
Chronic diarrhea is quite different, and most patients
with this condition will receive some degree of testing.
Many exams are the same as for an acute episode, as
some infections and parasites cause both types of diar-
rhea. A careful history to evaluate medication use,
dietary changes, family history of illnesses, and other
symptoms is necessary. Key points in determining the
seriousness of symptoms are weight loss of over 10 lb
(4.5 kg), blood in the stool, and nocturnal diarrhea
(symptoms that awaken the patient from sleep).
Both prescription and over-the-counter medications
can contain additives, such as lactose and sorbitol, that
will produce diarrhea in sensitive individuals. Review of
allergies or skin changes may also point to a cause.
Social history may indicate if stress is playing a role or
identify activities which can be associated with diarrhea
(for example, diarrhea that occurs in runners).
A combination of stool, blood, and urine tests may
be needed in the evaluation of chronic diarrhea; in addi-
tion a number of endoscopic and x-ray studies are fre-
quently required.