None

Procedure
The surgery team for coronary artery bypass graft
surgery includes the cardiovascular surgeon, assisting sur-
geons, a cardiovascular anesthesiologist, a perfusion tech-
nologist (who operates the heart-lung machine), and spe-
cially trained nurses. After general anesthesia is adminis-
tered, the surgeon removes the veins or prepares the arter-
ies for grafting. If the saphenous vein is to be used, a series
of incisions are made in the patient’s thigh or calf. More
commonly, a segment of the internal mammary artery will
be used and the incisions are made in the chest wall. The
surgeon then makes an incision from the patient’s neck to
navel, saws through the breastbone, and retracts the rib
cage open to expose the heart. The patient is connected to
a heart-lung machine, also called a cardiopulmonary
bypass pump, that cools the body to reduce the need for
oxygen and takes over for the heart and lungs during the
procedure. The heart is then stopped and a cold solution of
potassium-enriched normal saline is injected into the aor-
tic root and the coronary arteries to lower the temperature
of the heart, which prevents damage to the tissue.
Next, a small opening is made just below the block-
age in the diseased coronary artery. Blood will be redirect-
ed through this opening once the graft is sewn in place. If a
leg vein is used, one end is connected to the coronary
artery and the other to the aorta. If a mammary artery is
used, one end is connected to the coronary artery while the
other remains attached to the aorta. The procedure is
repeated on as many coronary arteries as necessary. Most
patients who have coronary artery bypass graft surgery
have at least three grafts done during the procedure.
Electric shocks start the heart pumping again after
the grafts have been completed. The heart-lung machine
is turned off and the blood slowly returns to normal body
temperature. After implanting pacing electrodes (if need-
ed) and inserting a chest tube, the surgeon closes the
chest cavity.
Success rate of coronary artery bypass graft surgery
About 90% of patients experience significant improve-
ments after coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Patients
experience full relief from chest pain and resume their nor-
mal activities in about 70% of the cases; the remaining
20% experience partial relief. In 5–10% of coronary artery
bypass graft surgeries, the bypass graft stops supplying
blood to the bypassed artery within one year. Younger peo-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
926