None

As noted above, the two things that are needed for
cholangitis to occur are: 1) obstruction to bile flow, and
2) presence of bacteria within the bile ducts. The most
common cause of cholangitis is infection of the bile
ducts due to blockage by a gallstone. Strictures (portions
of ducts that have become narrow) also function in the
same way. Strictures may be due to congenital (birth)
abnormalities of the bile ducts, form as a result of injury
to the bile duct (such as surgery, trauma), or result from
inflammation that leads to scar tissue and narrowing.
The bacterium most commonly associated with infec-
tion of the bile ducts is Escherichia coli (E. coli) which is a
normal inhabitant of the intestine. In some cases, more
than one type of bacteria is involved. Patients with AIDS
can develop infection of narrowed bile ducts with unusual
organisms such as Cryptosporidium and others.
The three symptoms present in about 70% of patients
with cholangitis are abdominal pain, fever, and jaundice.
Some patients only have chills and fever with minimal
abdominal symptoms. Jaundice or yellow discoloration of
the skin and eyes occurs in about 80% of patients. The
color change is due to bile pigments that accumulate in the
blood and eventually in the skin and eyes.
Inflammation due to the autoimmune disease prima-
ry sclerosing cholangitis leads to multiple areas of nar-
rowing and eventual infection. Tumors can block the bile
duct and also cause cholangitis, but as noted, infection is
relatively infrequent; in fact cholangitis occurs in only
about one in six patients with tumors.
Another type of bile duct infection occurs mainly in
Southeast Asia and is known as recurrent pyogenic
cholangitis or Oriental cholangitis. It has also been iden-
tified in Asians immigrating to North America. Most
patients have stones in the bile ducts and/or gallbladder,
and many cases are associated with the presence of para-
sites within the ducts. The role of parasites in causing
infection is not clear. Many researchers believe that they
are just coincidental, and have nothing to do with the
stones or infection.