None

Crohn’s disease involves inflammation of the intes-
tine, especially the small intestine. Inflammation refers
to swelling, redness, and loss of normal function. There
is evidence that the inflammation is caused by various
products of the immune system that attack the body itself
instead of helpfully attacking a foreign invader (a virus
or bacteria, for example). The inflammation of Crohn’s
disease most commonly affects the last part of the ileum
(a section of the small intestine), and often includes the
large intestine (the colon). However, inflammation may
also occur in other areas of the gastrointestinal tract,
affecting the mouth, esophagus, or stomach. Crohn’s dis-
ease differs from ulcerative colitis, the other major type
of IBD, in two important ways:
• The inflammation of Crohn’s disease may be discontin-
uous, meaning that areas of involvement in the intestine
may be separated by normal, unaffected segments of
intestine. The affected areas are called “regional enteri-
tis,” while the normal areas are called “skip areas.”
• The inflammation of Crohn’s disease affects all the lay-
ers of the intestinal wall, while ulcerative colitis affects
only the lining of the intestine.
Also, ulcerative colitis does not usually involve the
small intestine; in rare cases it involves the terminal
ileum (so-called “backwash” ileitis).
In addition to inflammation, Crohn’s disease causes
ulcerations, or irritated pits in the intestinal wall. These
pits occur because the inflammation has made areas of
tissue shed.
Crohn’s disease may be diagnosed at any age,
although most diagnoses are made between the ages of
15–35. About 0.02–0.04% of the population suffers from
this disorder, with men and women having an equal
chance of being stricken. Whites are more frequently
affected than other racial groups, and people of Jewish ori-
gin are between three and six times more likely to suffer
from IBD. IBD runs in families; an IBD patient has a 20%
chance of having other relatives who are fellow sufferers.
Crohn’s disease is a chronic disorder. While the
symptoms can be improved, a patient will not be com-
pletely cured of the underlying disease.