The air we breathe is mostly a mixture of two gases,
nitrogen (78%) and oxygen (21%). Unlike oxygen, nitro-
gen is a biologically inert gas, meaning that it is not
metabolized (converted into other substances) by the
body. For this reason, most of the nitrogen we inhale is
expelled when we exhale, but some is dissolved into the
blood and other tissues. During a dive, however, the
lungs take in more nitrogen than usual. This happens
because the surrounding water pressure is greater than
the air pressure at sea level (twice as great at 33 ft [10 m],
for instance). As the water pressure increases, so does the
pressure of the nitrogen in the compressed air inhaled by
the diver. Because increased pressure causes an increase
in gas density, the diver takes in more nitrogen with each
breath than he or she would at sea level. Instead of being
exhaled, however, the extra nitrogen safely dissolves into
the tissues, where it remains until the diver begins his or
her return to the surface (under some circumstances the
extra nitrogen can cause nitrogen narcosis, but that con-
dition is distinct from DCS). On the way up, decompres-
sion occurs (in other words, the water pressure drops),
and with the change in pressure, the extra nitrogen grad-
ually diffuses out of the tissues and is delivered by the
bloodstream to the lungs, which expel it from the body. If
the diver surfaces too quickly, however, potentially dan-
gerous nitrogen bubbles can form in the tissues and cause
DCS. These bubbles can compress nerves, obstruct arter-
ies, veins, and lymphatic vessels, and trigger harmful
chemical reactions in the blood. The precise reasons for
bubble formation remain unclear.
How much extra nitrogen enters the tissues varies
with the dive’s depth and duration. Dive tables prepared
by the U.S. Navy and other organizations specify how
long most divers can safely remain at a particular depth.
If the dive table limits are exceeded, the diver must pause
on the way up to allow the nitrogen to diffuse into the
bloodstream without forming bubbles; these pauses are
called decompression stops, and are carefully calibrated.
DCS can occur, however, even when a diver obeys safe
diving rules. In such cases, the predisposing factors
include fatigue, obesity, dehydration, hypothermia,
and recent alcohol use. As well, people who fly or travel
to high-altitude locations without letting 12–24 hours
pass after their last dive are at risk for DCS as well
because their bodies undergo further decompression.
This is true even when flying in commercial aircraft.
Many travelers are unaware that to save money on fuel
the cabin pressure in commercial aircraft is set much
lower than the pressure at sea level. At 30,000 ft (9,144
m), for instance, cabin pressure is usually equivalent to
the pressure at 7,000–8,000 ft (2,133–2,438 m) above sea
level, a safe setting for everyone but recent divers. Exact-
ly how long a diver should wait before flying or traveling
to a high-altitude location depends on how much diving
he or she has done and other considerations. If there is
uncertainty about the appropriate waiting period, the sen-
sible course of action is to let the full 24 hours pass.
Because the nitrogen bubbles that cause DCS can
affect any of the body’s tissues, including the blood,
bones, nerves, and muscles, many kinds of symptoms are
possible. Symptoms can appear minutes after a diver sur-
faces, and in about 80% of cases do so within eight
hours. Pain is often the only symptom; this is sometimes
called the bends, although many people incorrectly use
that term as a synonym for DCS itself. The pain, which
ranges from mild to severe, is usually limited to the
joints, but can be felt anywhere. Severe itching (pruritis),
skin rashes, and skin mottling (cutis marmorata) are
other possible symptoms. All of these are sometimes
classified as manifestations of type 1 or “mild” DCS.
type 2 or “serious” DCS can lead, among other things, to
paralysis, brain damage, heart attacks, and death. Many
DCS victims, however, experience both type 1 and type 2
symptoms.

None