None

It is clear that Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is caused by
an infectious agent, but it is not yet clear what type of
agent that is. Originally assumed to be a virus, evidence
is accumulating that, instead, CJD is caused by a protein
called a prion (PREE-on, for “proteinaceous infectious
particle”) transmitted from victim to victim. The other
spongiform encephalopathies are also hypothesized to be
due to prion infection.
If this hypothesis is proved true, it would represent
one of the most radical new ideas in biology since the
discovery of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). All infec-
tious diseases, in fact all life, uses nucleic acids—DNA
or ribonucleic acid (RNA)—to code the instructions
needed for reproduction. Inactivation of the nucleic acids
destroys the capacity to reproduce. However, when these
same measures are applied to infected tissue from
spongiform encephalopathy victims, infectivity is not
destroyed. Furthermore, purification of infected tissue to
concentrate the infectious fraction yields protein, not
nucleic acid. While it remains possible that some highly
stable nucleic acid remains hidden within the purified
protein, this is seemingly less and less likely as further
experiments are done. The “prion hypothesis,” as it is
called, is now widely accepted, at least provisionally, by
most researchers in the field. The most vocal proponent
of the hypothesis, Stanley Prusiner, was awarded the
Nobel Prize in 1997 for his work in the prion diseases.
A prion is an altered form of a normal brain protein.
The normal protein has a helical shape along part of its
length. In the prion form, a sheet structure replaces the
helix. According to the hypothesis, when the normal
form interacts with the prion form, some of its helical
part is converted to a sheet, thus creating a new prion
capable of transforming other normal forms. In this way,
the disease process resembles crystallization more than
typical viral infection, in which the virus commands the
host’s cellular machinery to reproduce more of the virus.
Build-up of the sheet form causes accumulation of
abnormal protein clumps and degeneration of brain cells,
which is thought to cause the disease.
The brain protein affected by the prion, called PrP, is
part of the membrane of brain cells, but its exact function
is unknown. It is composed of about 250 subunits, called
amino acids, coded for by a gene on chromosome 20.
Slight genetic differences, called polymorphisms, give
rise to two slightly different normal protein forms: sub-
unit 129 is a “methionine” in one form, but is “valine” in
the other. A person may have all of one, all of the other,
or a mixture of the two, depending on their genetic inher-
itance. Both forms have the normal helical structure, and
function normally. However, susceptibility to prion con-
version is influenced by subunit 129: a person with a
mixture of forms is more resistant to conversion. All the
cases of vCJD tested have had just methionine at 129.
Exposure to the infectious agent is, of course, still
required for disease development. Prion diseases are not
contagious in the usual sense, and transmission from an
infected person to another person requires direct inocula-
tion of infectious material.
Familial CJD, on the other hand, does not require
exposure, but develops through the inheritance of other,
more disruptive mutations in the gene for the normal PrP
protein. Researchers believe these mutations increase the
likelihood that the protein may more spontaneously
“flip” to the sheet form; once created, these can then con-
vert other normal-form molecules. The other two inherit-
ed human prion diseases,
Gerstmann-Straussler-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
952
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Scheinker disease and fatal familial insomnia, involve
different mutations in the same gene.
The large majority of CJD cases are sporadic, mean-
ing they have no known route of infection or genetic link.
Causes of sporadic CJD are likely to be diverse and may
include spontaneous genetic mutation, spontaneous pro-
tein changes, or unrecognized exposure to infectious
agents. It is highly likely that future research will identi-
fy more risk factors associated with sporadic CJD.