drowning/suffocation, might cause CP. Likewise, inges-
tion of a toxic substance such as lead, mercury, poisons,
or certain chemicals could cause neurological damage.
Accidental overdose of certain medications might also
cause similar damage to the central nervous system.
By definition, the defect in cerebral function causing
CP is nonprogressive. However, the symptoms of CP
often change over time. Most of the symptoms of CP
relate in some way to the aberrant control of muscles. To
review, CP is categorized first by the type of move-
ment/postural disturbance(s) present, then by a descrip-
tion of which limbs are affected, and finally by the sever-
ity of motor impairment. For example, spastic diplegia
refers to continuously tight muscles that have no volun-
tary control in both legs, while athetoid quadraparesis
describes uncontrolled writhing movements and muscle
weakness in all four limbs. These three-part descriptions
are helpful in providing a general picture, but cannot give
a complete description of any one person with CP. In
addition, the various “forms” of CP do not occur with
equal frequency—spastic diplegia is seen in more indi-
viduals than is athetoid quadraparesis. CP can also be
loosely categorized as mild, moderate, or severe, but
these are very subjective terms with no firm boundaries
between them.
A muscle that is tensed and contracted is hypertonic,
while excessively loose muscles are hypotonic. Spastic,
hypertonic muscles can cause serious orthopedic prob-
lems, including scoliosis (spine curvature), hip disloca-
tion, or contractures. A contracture is shortening of a
muscle, aided sometimes by a weak-opposing force from
a neighboring muscle. Contractures may become perma-
nent, or “fixed,” without some sort of intervention. Fixed
contractures may cause postural abnormalities in the
affected limbs. Clenched fists and contracted feet (equi-
nus or equinovarus) are common in people with CP.
Spasticity in the thighs causes them to turn in and cross
at the knees, resulting in an unusual method of walking
known as a “scissors gait.” Any of the joints in the limbs
may be stiff (immobilized) due to spasticity of the
attached muscles.
Athetosis and dyskinesia often occur with spasticity,
but do not often occur alone. The same is true of ataxia.
It is important to remember that “mild CP” or “severe
CP” refers not only to the number of symptoms present,
but also to the level of involvement of any particular
class of symptoms.
Mechanisms that can cause CP are not always
restricted to motor-control areas of the brain. Other neu-
rologically based symptoms may include:
• mental retardation/learning disabilities
• behavioral disorders
• seizure disorders
• visual impairment
• hearing loss
• speech impairment (dysarthria)
• abnormal sensation and perception
These problems may have a greater impact on a
child’s life than the physical impairments of CP, although
not all children with CP are affected by other problems.
Many infants and children with CP have growth impair-
ment. About one-third of individuals with CP have moder-
ate-to-severe mental retardation, one-third have mild men-
tal retardation, and one-third have normal intelligence.

None