The symptoms of infection and resulting complica-
tions are dependent upon the strain of E. coli and the site
of infection. These bacteria produce toxins that have a
wide range of effects. Symptoms caused by some E. coli
infections range from mild to severe, bloody diarrhea,
acute abdominal pain, vomiting, and fever. Gastroin-
testinal complications that can cause E. coli infections
include irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) ischemic coli-
tis, appendicitis, perforation of the large bowel, and in
some instances gangrene in the colon. Other known E.
coli-causing infections may include chronic renal failure,
pancreatitis, and diabetes mellitus. Some neurological
symptoms such as drowsiness, seizure and coma may
occur. In infants, E. coli infections are present in cases of
infantile gastroenteritis and neonatal meningitis.
Strains of E. coli that produce diarrhea were initially
distinguished by their O (somatic) antigens found on the
bacterial surface. Although there is an overlap in charac-
teristics between strains, they may be classified into four
main groups; enterohemorrahagic (0157),enteropatho-
genic (055,0111),
enterotoxigenic (06,078),
and
enteroinvasive (0124,0164).
E.coli O157 (VTEC)
The O157:H7 strain is the member of the group most
often associated with a particularly severe form of diar-
rhea. (The O indicates the somatic antigen, while the H
denotes the flagellar antigen, both of which are found on
the cell surface of the bacteria.) The bacterium was dis-
covered in 1977, and first reports of infections followed in
1982. E. coli O157:H7, as it is frequently referred to by
researchers, causes bloody diarrhea in many infected
patients. It accounts for about 2% of all cases of diarrhea
in the western world, and at least one-third of cases of
hemorrhagic colitis, or about 20,000 cases per year
E. coli O157:H7 is also the most common cause of
unique syndromes, known as the Hemolytic-Uremic
Syndrome (HUS) and thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP),
which causes kidney failure, hemolytic anemia, and
thrombocytopenia. Usually, infection with this strain of
bacteria will subside without further complications.
However, about 5% of people who are infected will
develop HUS/TTP. This infection also accounts for the
majority of episodes of HUS, especially in children.
This strain of bacteria produces a potent toxin called
verotoxin, named for toxin’s ability to kill green monkey
kidney or “vero” cells. Bacteria that produce verotoxin
are referred to as Verotoxin-producing E. coli (VTEC).
The numbers of bacteria that are necessary to reproduce
infectious levels of bacteria are quite small, estimated at
10-100 viable bacteria. These toxins are lethal for intesti-
nal cells and those that line vessels (endothelial cells),
inhibiting protein synthesis causing cell death. It is
believed that the damage to blood vessels results in the
formation of clots, which eventually leads to the
Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome. HUS/TTP is a serious,
often fatal, syndrome that has other causes in addition to
E. coli O157:H7; it is characterized by the breaking up of
red blood cells (hemolysis) and kidney failure (uremia).
The syndrome occurs most often in the very young and
very old.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1235

None