Voluntary movement (walking, grasping, chewing, etc.) is primarily accomplished using muscles that are attached to bones, known as the skeletal muscles. Control of the skeletal muscles originates in the cerebral cortex, the largest portion of the brain. Palsy means paralysis, but may also be used to describe uncontrolled muscle movement. Therefore, cerebral palsy encompasses any disorder of abnormal movement and paralysis caused by abnormal function of the cerebral cortex. In truth, howev- er, CP does not include conditions due to progressive dis- ease or degeneration of the brain. For this reason, CP is also referred to as static (nonprogressive) encephalopathy (disease of the brain). Also excluded from CP are any dis- orders of muscle control that arise in the muscles them- selves and/or in the peripheral nervous system (nerves outside the brain and spinal cord). CP is not a specific diagnosis, but is more accurately considered a description—a description of a broad but defined group of neurological and physical problems. The symptoms of CP and their severity are quite variable. Those with CP may have only minor difficulty with fine motor skills, such as grasping and manipulating items with their hands. A severe form of CP could involve significant muscle problems in all four limbs, mental retardation, seizures, and difficulties with vision, speech, and hearing. Muscles that receive defective messages from the brain may be constantly contracted and tight (spastic), exhibit involuntary writhing movements (athetosis), or have difficulty with voluntary movement (dyskinesia). There can also be a lack of balance and coordination with unsteady movements (ataxia). A combination of any of these problems may also occur. Spastic CP and mixed CP constitute the majority of cases. Effects on the mus- cles can range from mild weakness or partial paralysis (paresis), to complete loss of voluntary control of a mus- cle or group of muscles (plegia). CP is also designated by the number of limbs affected. For instance, affected mus- cles in one limb is monoplegia, both arms or both legs is diplegia, both limbs on one side of the body is hemiple- gia, and in all four limbs is quadriplegia. Muscles of the trunk, neck, and head may be affected as well. CP can be caused by a number of different mecha- nisms at various times—from several weeks after concep- tion, through birth, to early childhood. For many years, it was accepted that most cases of CP were due to brain injuries received during a traumatic birth, known as birth asphyxia. However, extensive research in the 1980s showed that only 5–10% of CP can be attributed to birth trauma. Other possible causes include abnormal develop- ment of the brain, prenatal factors that directly or indirectly damage neurons in the developing brain, premature birth, and brain injuries that occur in the first few years of life. Advances in the medical care of premature infants in the last 20 years have dramatically increased the rate of survival of these fragile newborns. However, as gesta- tional age at delivery and birth weight of