None

Inflammation—Pain, redness, swelling, and heat
that usually develop in response to injury or illness.
Lupus erythematosus—A chronic disease that
affects the skin, joints, and certain internal organs.
Pancreas—A gland located beneath the stomach.
The pancreas produces juices that help break
down food.
Potassium—A mineral found in whole grains,
meat, legumes, and some fruits and vegetables.
Potassium is important for many body processes,
including proper functioning of the nerves and
muscles.
Triglyceride—A substance formed in the body from
fat in the diet. Triglycerides are the main fatty mate-
rials in the blood. Together with protein, they make
up high- and low-density lipoproteins (HDLs and
LDLs). Triglyceride levels are important in the diag-
nosis and treatment of many diseases including
high blood pressure, diabetes, and heart disease.
• Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, such
as benazepril (Lotensin), captopril (Capoten), and
enalapril (Vasotec), used to treat high blood pressure.
Taking these drugs with potassium-sparing diuretics
may cause levels of potassium in the blood to be too
high, increasing the chance of side effects.
• Cholesterol-lowering drugs such as cholestyramine
(Questran) and colestipol (Colestid). Taking these
drugs with combination diuretics such as Dyazide and
Maxzide may keep the diuretic from working. Take the
diuretic at least one hour before or four hours after the
cholesterol-lowering drug.
• Cyclosporine (Sandimmune), a medicine that suppress-
es the immune system. Taking this medicine with
potassium-sparing diuretics may increase the chance of
side effects by causing levels of potassium in the blood
to be too high.
• Potassium supplements, other medicines containing
potassium, or salt substitutes that contain potassium.
Taking these with potassium-sparing diuretics may lead
to too much potassium in the blood, increasing the
chance of side effects.
• Lithium, used to treat bipolar disorder (manic-depres-
sive illness). Using this medicine with potassium-spar-
ing diuretics may allow lithium to build up to poiso-
nous levels in the body.
• Digitalis heart drugs, such as digoxin (Lanoxin). Using
this medicine with combination diuretics such as tri-
amterene-hydrocholorthiazide (Dyazide, Maxzide) may
cause blood levels of the heart medicine to be too high,
making side effects such as changes in heartbeat more
likely.
The list above does not include every drug that may
interact with diuretics. Check with a physician or phar-
macist before combining diuretics with any other pre-
scription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine.
Nancy Ross-Flanigan