Congenital—Existing at birth.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome—A rare inheritable dis-
ease of the connective tissue marked by very elastic
skin, very loose joints, and very fragile body tissue.
Embolization—A technique to stop or prevent hem-
orrhage by introducing a foreign mass, such as an
air-filled membrane (balloon), into a blood vessel to
block the flow of blood.
Fibromuscular dysplasia—A disorder that causes
unexplained narrowing of arteries and high blood
pressure.
Magnetic resonance angiography—A noninvasive
diagnostic technique that uses radio waves to map
the internal anatomy of the blood vessels.
Marfan syndrome—An inheritable disorder that
affects the skeleton, joints, and blood vessels. Major
indicators are excessively long arms and legs, lax
joints, and vascular defects.
Nimodipine (Nimotop)—A calcium-channel block-
er, that is, a drug that relaxes arterial smooth muscle
by slowing the movement of calcium across cell
walls.
Polycystic kidney disease—An abnormal condition
in which the kidneys are enlarged and contain
many cysts.
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum—A hereditary disorder
of the connective, or elastic, tissue marked by pre-
mature aging and breakdown of the skin and
degeneration of the arteries that leads to hemor-
rhages.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH)—Loss of blood
into the subarachnoid space, the fluid-filled area
that surrounds the brain tissue.
Vasospasm—Narrowing of a blood vessel caused
by a spasm of the smooth muscle of the vessel wall.
72 hours of the rupture. Later scans may miss the signs
of hemorrhage.
If the CT scan is negative for a hemorrhage or pro-
vides an unclear diagnosis, the doctor will order a cere-
brospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, also called a lumbar
puncture. In this procedure, a small amount of cere-
brospinal fluid is removed from the lower back and
examined for traces of blood and blood-breakdown prod-
ucts. If this test is positive, cerebral angiography is used
to map the brain’s blood vessels and the damaged area.
The angiography is done to pinpoint the aneurysm’s
location. About 15% of people who experience SAH
have more than one aneurysm. For this reason, angiogra-
phy should include both the common carotid artery that
feeds the front of the brain and the vertebral artery that
feeds the base of the brain. Occasionally, the angiogra-
phy fails to find the aneurysm and must be repeated. If
seizures occur, electroencephalography (EEG) may be
used to measure the electrical activity of the brain.

None