None

Proteins are sometimes produced by cancers, and
these may be elevated in the patient’s blood. When this
occurs, the protein produced is known as a tumor marker.
There is a tumor marker for some cancers of the colon; it
is known as carcinoembryonic antigen, or CEA. Unfortu-
nately, this protein may be made by other adenocarcino-
mas as well, or it may not be produced by a particular
colon cancer. Therefore, screening by chemical analysis
for CEA has not been helpful. CEA has been helpful
when used in a follow-up role for patients treated for
colon cancer if their tumor makes the protein.
Indirect visualization of the colon may be accom-
plished by placing barium through the rectum and filling the
colon with this compound. Barium produces a white con-
trast image of the lining of the colon on x ray and thus, the
contour of the lining of the colon may be seen. Detail can be
increased if the barium utilized is thinned and air also intro-
duced. These studies are known as the barium enema (BE)
and the double contrast barium enema (DCBE).
Direct visualization of the lining of the colon is
accomplished using a scope or endoscope. The physician
introduces the instrument through the rectum and passes
it proximally, visualizing the colon epithelium in the
process. Older, shorter scopes were rigid. Today, utiliz-
ing fiberoptic technology, the scopes are flexible and can
reach much farther. If the left colon only is visualized, it
is called flexible sigmoidoscopy. When the entire colon
is visualized, the procedure is known as colonoscopy.
Unlike the indirect visualizations of the colon (the
BE and the DCBE), the endoscopic screeenings allow the
physician to remove polyps and biopsy suspicious tissue.
(A biopsy is a removal of tissue for examination by a
pthologist.) For this reason, many physicians prefer endo-
scopic screening. All of the visualizations, the BE,
DCBE, and each type of endoscopy require pre-procedure
preparation (evacuation) of the colon.
The American Cancer Society has recommended the
following screening protocol for those of normal risk
over 50 years of age:
• yearly DRE with occult blood in stool testing
• flexible sigmoidoscopy at age 50
• flexible sigmoidoscopy repeated every five years
Many physicians, however, recommend full colono-
scopy every five to seven years. Screening evaluations
should start sooner for patients who have predisposing
factors, such as family history, history of polyps, or a
familial syndrome.