None

Bipolar disorder—Manic depressive disorder. A
mood disorder characterized by manic highs and
depressive lows.
Child development—The process of physical, intel-
lectual, emotional, and social growth that occurs
from infancy through adolescence. Erik Erikson,
Margaret Mahler, Sigmund Freud, and Jean Piaget
are among the most well-known child development
theorists.
CPR—Cardiopulmonary resuscitation. A first aid
technique designed to stimulate breathing and
blood flow through a combination of chest com-
pressions and rescue breathing.
Immunization—Creating immunity to a disease
through a vaccine injection that stimulates the pro-
duction of antibodies.
Learning disabilities—An impairment of the cogni-
tive processes of understanding and using spoken
and written language that results in difficulties with
one or more academic skill sets (e.g., reading, writ-
ing, mathematics).
Motor skills—Controlled movement of muscle
groups. Fine motor skills involve tasks that require
dexterity of small muscles, such as buttoning a shirt.
Tasks such as walking or throwing a ball involve the
use of gross motor skills.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder—Also known as
OCD; a disorder characterized by obsessive
thoughts (e.g., fear of contamination) and compul-
sive behaviors (e.g., repetitive hand washing) that
cause distress and/or functional impairment.
Psychological tests—Written, verbal, or visual tasks
that assess psychological functioning, intelligence,
and/or personality traits.
Type 1 diabetes—A chronic immune system disor-
der in which the pancreas does not produce suffi-
cient amounts of insulin, a hormone that enables
cells to use glucose for energy. Also called juvenile
diabetes, it must be treated with insulin injections.
may be suffering from mental illness. Mental health
problems that may afflict children include:
• Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
According to the AAP, 4–12% of school-aged children
have ADHD, a condition characterized by poor impulse
control and excessive motor activity.
• Learning disorders. Learning disabilities affect one in
10 school children.
• Depression, anxiety, and bipolar disorder. Affective,
or mood, disorders can affect kids as well as adults.
• Eating disorders. Anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa,
and binge eating disorder (BED) frequently occur in
adolescent girls.
• Schizophrenia. A disorder characterized by bizarre
thoughts and behaviors, paranoia, impaired sense of
reality, and psychosis may be diagnosed in childhood.
• Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Also called OCD, this
anxiety disorder afflicts one in 200 children.
• Autism and pervasive developmental disorder. Severe
developmental disabilities that cause a child to become
withdrawn and unresponsive.
• Mental retardation. Children under age 18 with an IQ
of 70 or below and impairments in adaptive functioning
are considered mentally retarded.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
762
Children’s health