None

E. coli O157:H7 is commonly found in cattle and
poultry, and outbreaks have of disease have been associ-
ated with cattle and bovine products. There are reports of
contamination from unpasteurized apple juice, hamburg-
er meat, radish sprouts, lettuce, and potatoes, as well as
other food sources. Environmental contamination may
occur in water drained from cattle pastures or water con-
taining human sewage used for drinking or swimming.
Human to human transmission, through contact with
fecal matter, has also been identified in daycare centers.
After an incubation period of three to four days on
average, watery diarrhea begins, which rapidly progresses
to bloody diarrhea in many victims, in which case the
bowel movement may be mostly blood. Nausea, vomit-
ing, and low-grade fever are also frequently present. Gas-
trointestinal symptoms last for about one week, and
recovery is often spontaneous. Symptomatic infection
may occur in about 10% of infected individuals. About 5-
10% of individuals, usually at the extremes of age or ele-
vated leukocyte count, develop HUS/TTP, and ultimately,
kidney failure. Patients taking antibiotics or medications
for gastric acidity may also be at risk. Neurological symp-
toms can also occur as part of HUS/TTP and consist of
seizures, paralysis, and coma. Rectal prolapse may also
be a complication, and in some cases colitis, appendicitis,
perforation of the large bowel, and gangrene in the bowel.
Systemically, the most prevalent complications of E. coli
157 infections are HUS and TTP.
E. coli non-O157 (VTEC)
These strains of E. coli produce verotoxin, but are
strains other than O157. There have been as many as one
hundred different types implicated in the development of
disease. Strain OH111 was found to be involved in out-
breaks in Australia, Japan, and Italy. The O128, O103,
and O55 groups have also been implicated in diarrhea
outbreaks. In Britain, cases of infantile gastroenteritis in
maternity hospitals and neonatal units have been attrib-
uted to the E. coli non-0157 group. Many of these organ-
isms have been identified in cattle.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli
Two toxins may be produced by this group, the heat-
labile enterotoxin (LT) that can produce enteritis in
infants, and a heat stable enterotoxin (ST), the action of
which has yet to be determined.
Enteroinvasive E. coli
Some strains of the enteroinvasive E. coli have been
involved in the development of gastroenteritis in infants.
These organisms do not produce and enterotoxin. The
cells of the intestine are affected, with the development
of symptoms that are typical of a shigellae infection.