The urogenital system, for some reason, is more
likely than any other to have birth defects, and they can
occur in endless variety. Ureters can be duplicated com-
pletely or partially, they can be in the wrong place, they
can be deformed, and they can end in the wrong place.
The trouble these abnormalities bring is directly related
to their effect on the flow of urine. As long as urine flows
normally through them, and only in one direction, no
harm is done.
• Duplication of ureters is quite common, either in part or
completely. Kidneys are sometimes duplicated as well.
Someone may have four kidneys and four ureters or two
kidneys, half of each drained by a separate ureter, or a sin-
gle kidney with two, three, or four ureters attached. As
long as urine can flow easily in the correct direction, such
malformations may never be detected. If, however, one of
the ureters has a dead end, a stricture or stenosis (narrow-
ing), or a leaky ureterovesical valve (valve between the
ureter and bladder), infection is the likely result.
• Stricture or stenosis of a ureter prevents urine from
flowing freely. Whenever flow is obstructed in the
body—urine, bile, mucus, or any other liquid—infec-
tion follows. Ureters can be obstructed anywhere along
their course, though the ureterovesical valve is the most
common place.
• A ureter may have an ectopic (out of place) orifice
(opening)—it may enter the bladder, or even another
structure, where it does not belong and therefore with-
out an adequate valve to control reflux.
• The primary ureter, or a duplicate, may not even reach
the bladder, but rather terminate in a dead end. Urine
will stagnate there and eventually cause infection.
• A ureter can be perfectly normal but in the wrong place,
such as behind the vena cava (the large vein in the mid-
dle of the abdomen). A so-called retrocaval ureter may
be pinched by the vena cava so that flow is hindered.
Other aberrant locations may also lead to compression
and impaired flow.
Besides infection, urine that backs up will cause the
ureter and the kidney to dilate. Eventually, the kidney
will stop functioning because of the back pressure. This
condition is called hydronephrosis—a kidney swollen
with urine.

None