None

Kidney failure is triggered by disease or a hereditary
disorder in the kidneys. Both kidneys are typically affect-
ed. The four most common causes of chronic kidney fail-
ure include:
• Diabetes. Diabetes mellitus (DM), both insulin depen-
dant (IDDM) and non-insulin dependant (NIDDM),
occurs when the body cannot produce and/or use
insulin, the hormone necessary for the body to process
glucose. Long-term diabetes may cause the glomeruli,
the filtering units located in the nephrons of the kid-
neys, to gradually lose functioning.
• Glomerulonephritis. Glomerulonephritis is a chronic
inflammation of the glomeruli, or filtering units of the
kidney. Certain types of glomerulonephritis are treat-
able, and may only cause a temporary disruption of kid-
ney functioning.
• Hypertension. High blood pressure is unique in that it
is both a cause and a major symptom of kidney failure.
The kidneys can become stressed and ultimately sustain
permanent damage from blood pushing through them at
an excessive level of pressure over a long period of time.
• Polycystic kidney disease. Polycystic kidney disease is
an inherited disorder that causes cysts to be formed on
the nephrons, or functioning units, of the kidneys. The
cysts hamper the regular functioning of the kidney.
Other possible causes of chronic kidney failure
include kidney cancer, obstructions such as kidney
stones, pyelonephritis, reflux nephropathy, systemic
lupus erythematosus, amyloidosis, sickle cell anemia,
Alport syndrome, and oxalosis.
Initially, symptoms of chronic kidney failure devel-
op slowly. Even individuals with mild to moderate kid-
ney failure may show few symptoms in spite of increased
urea in their blood. Among the symptoms that may be
present at this point are frequent urination during the
night and high blood pressure.
Most symptoms of chronic kidney failure are not
apparent until kidney disease has progressed significant-
ly. Common symptoms include:
• Anemia. The kidneys are responsible for the production
of erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone which stimulates red
blood cell production. If kidney disease causes shrinking
of the kidney, this red cell production is hampered.
• Bad breath or a bad taste in mouth. Urea, or waste prod-
ucts, in the saliva may cause an ammonia-like taste in
the mouth.
• Bone and joint problems. The kidneys produce vitamin
D, which aids in the absorption of calcium and keeps
bones strong. For patients with kidney failure, bones
may become brittle, and in the case of children, normal
growth may be stunted. Joint pain may also occur as a
result of unchecked phosphate levels in the blood.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
806