Hearing loss is caused by a number of different
problems that occur either in the hearing nerve or parts of
the middle or inner ear. The most common type of deaf-
ness is caused by damaged hair cells in the cochlea, the
hearing part of the inner ear. Normally, hair cells stimu-
late the hearing nerve, which transmits sound signals to
the brain. When hair cells stop functioning, the hearing
nerve remains unstimulated, and the person can’t hear.
Hair cells can be destroyed by many things, including
infection, trauma, loud noise, aging, or birth defects.
All cochlear implants consist of a microphone
worn behind the ear that picks up sound and sends it
along a wire to a speech processor, which is worn in a
small shoulder pouch, pocket, or belt. The processor
boosts the sound, filters out background noise, and
turns sound into digital signals before sending it to a
transmitter worn behind the ear. A magnet holds the
transmitter in place through its attraction to the
receiver-stimulator, a part of the device that is surgical-
ly attached beneath the skin in the skull. The receiver
picks up digital signs forwarded by the transmitter, and
converts them into electrical impulses. These electrical
impulses flow through electrodes contained in a narrow,
flexible tube that has been threaded into the cochlea.
As many as 24 electrodes (depending on the type of
implant) carry the impulses that stimulate the hearing
nerve. The brain then interprets the signals as specific
sounds.
Despite the benefits that the implant appears to offer,
some hearing specialists and members of the deaf com-
munity still believe that the benefits may not outweigh
the risks and limitations of the device. Because the
device must be surgically implanted, it carries some sur-
gical risk. Also, manufacturers can’t promise how well a
person will hear with an implant. Moreover, after getting
an implant, some people say they feel alienated from the
Deaf community, while at the same time not feeling fully
a part of the hearing world.
The sounds heard through an implant are different
from the normal hearing sounds, and have been
described as artificial or “robotlike.” This is because the
implant’s handful of electrodes cannot hope to match the
complexity of a person’s 15,000 hair cells.

None