In the United States, cervical cancer is the fifth most
common cancer among women aged 35–54, and the third
most common cancer of the female reproductive tract. In
some developing countries, it is the most common type
of cancer. It generally begins as an abnormality in the
cells on the outside of the cervix. The cervix is the lower
part or neck of the uterus (womb). It connects the body
of the uterus to the vagina (birth canal).
Approximately 90% of cervical cancers are squamous
cell carcinomas. This type of cancer originates in the thin,
flat, squamous cells on the surface of the ectocervix, the
part of the cervix that is next to the vagina. (Squamous
cells are the thin, flat cells of the surfaces of the skin and
cervix and linings of various organs.) Another 10% of cer-
vical cancers are of the adenocarcinoma type. This cancer
originates in the mucus-producing cells of the inner or
endocervix, near the body of the uterus. Occasionally, the
cancer may have characteristics of both types and is called
adenosquamous carcinoma or mixed carcinoma.
The initial changes that may occur in some cervical
cells are not cancerous. However, these precancerous
cells form a lesion called dysplasia or a squamous
intraepithelial lesion (SIL), since it occurs within the
epithelial or outer layer of cells. These abnormal cells
can also be described as cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
(CIN). Moderate to severe dysplasia may be called carci-
noma in situ or non-invasive cervical cancer.
Dysplasia is a common condition and the abnormal
cells often disappear without treatment. However, these
precancerous cells can become cancerous. This may take
years, although it can happen in less than a year. Eventu-
ally, the abnormal cells start to grow uncontrollably into
the deeper layers of the cervix, becoming an invasive cer-
vical cancer.
Although cervical cancer used to be one of the most
common causes of cancer death among American
women, in the past 40 years there has been a 75% decrease
in mortality. This is primarily due to routine screening
with Pap tests (Pap smear), to identify precancerous and
early-invasive stages of cervical cancer. With treatment,
these conditions have a cure rate of nearly 100%.
Worldwide, there are more than 400,000 new cases
of cervical cancer diagnosed each year. The American
Cancer Society (ACS) estimates that there will be 12,900
new cases of invasive cervical cancer diagnosed in the
United States in 2001. More than one million women
will be diagnosed with a precancerous lesion or non-
invasive cancer of the cervix.
Older women are at the highest risk for cervical can-
cer. Although girls under the age of 15 rarely develop this
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
711

None