Chancroid is an infection of the genitals that is
caused by the bacterium Haemophilus ducreyi. Chan-
croid is a sexually transmitted disease, which means that
it is spread from person to person almost always by sexu-
al contact. However, there have been a few cases in
which healthcare providers have become infected
through contact with infected patients.
Common locations for chancroid sores (ulcers) in
men are the shaft or head of the penis, foreskin, the
groove behind the head of the penis, the opening of the
penis, and the scrotum. In women, common locations are
the labia majora (outer lips), labia minora (inner lips),
perianal area (area around the anal opening), and inner
thighs. It is rare for the ulcer(s) to be on the vaginal walls
or cervix. In about 50% of the patients with chancroid,
the infection spreads to either or both of the lymph nodes
in the groin.
Chancroid is most commonly found in developing
and third world countries. In the United States, the most
common cause of genital ulcers is genital herpes, fol-
lowed by syphilis, and then chancroid. As of 1997, there
were fewer than 1,500 cases of chancroid in the United
States per year and it occurred primarily in African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Native Americans.
There are occasional localized outbreaks of chancroid in
the United States. In addition, the practice of exchanging
sex for drugs has lead to a link between crack cocaine
use and chancroid.
Even though the incidence of chancroid in the United
States decreased in the 1990s, there is an alarming con-
nection between chancroid and human immunodeficien-
cy virus (HIV) infection. HIV causes AIDS (acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome) and is easily spread from
person to person through chancroid ulcers. Uncircum-
cised men with chancroid ulcers have a 48% risk of
acquiring HIV from sexual contact. Women with chan-
croid ulcers are also at a greater risk of being infected
with HIV during sexual contact. Genital ulcers seem to
act as doorways for HIV to enter and exit.

None