None

Visual acuity measures how clearly the patient can
see. It is measured for each eye separately, with and
without the current prescription. It is usually measured
with a Snellen eye chart, a poster with lines of different-
sized letters, each line with a number at the side denoting
the distance from which a person with normal vision can
read that line. Other kinds of eye charts with identifiable
figures are available for children or anyone unfamiliar
with the Roman alphabet. These charts are made to be
placed at a certain distance (usually 20 ft) from the per-
son being tested. At this distance, people with normal
vision can read a certain line (usually the lowest),
marked the 20/20 line; these people are said to have
20/20 vision. For people who can’t read the smallest line,
the examiner assigns a ratio based on the smallest line
they can read. The first number (numerator) of the ratio
is the distance between the chart and the patient, and the
second number (denominator) is the distance where a
person with normal vision would be able to read that
line. The ratio 20/40 means the patient can see at 20 ft.
what people with normal vision can see at 40 ft. away.
When a patient is unable to read any lines on the
chart, they are moved closer until they can read the line
with the largest letters. The acuity is still measured the
same way. A ratio of 5/200 means the person being tested
can see at 5 ft what a normal person can see 200 ft.
When a patient can’t read the chart at all, the exam-
iner may hold up some fingers and ask the patient to
count them at various distances, and records the result as
“counting fingers” at the distance of recognition. If the
patient cannot count the examiner’s fingers at any dis-
tance, the examiner determines if the patient can see
hand movements. If so, the result is recorded as “hand
movements.” If not, the examiner determines if the
patient can detect light from a penlight. If the patient can
detect the light but not its direction, the result is recorded
at “light perception.” If the patient can recognize its
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1262