None

The CEA test is ordered for patients with known
cancers. The CEA test is most commonly ordered when a
patient has a cancer of the gastrointestinal system. These
include cancer of the colon, rectum, stomach (gastric
cancer), esophagus, liver, or pancreas. It is also used with
cancers of the breast, lung, or prostate.
The CEA level in the blood is one of the factors that
doctors consider when determining the prognosis, or
most likely outcome of a cancer. In general, a higher
CEA level predicts a more severe disease, one that is less
likely to be curable. But it does not give clear-cut infor-
mation. The results of a CEA test are usually considered
along with other laboratory and/or imaging studies to fol-
low the course of the disease.
Once treatment for the cancer has begun, CEA tests
have a valuable role in monitoring the patient’s progress.
A decreasing CEA level means therapy is effective in
fighting the cancer. A stable or increasing CEA level may
mean the treatment is not working, and/or that the tumor
is growing. It is important to understand that serial CEA
measurements, which means several done over a period
of time, are the most useful. A single test result is diffi-
cult to evaluate, but a number of tests, done weeks apart,
shows trends in disease progression or regression.
Certain types of cancer treatments, such as hormone
therapy for breast cancer, may actually cause the CEA
level to go up. This elevation does not accurately reflect
the state of the disease. It is sometimes referred to as a
“flare response.” Recognition that a rise in CEA may be
temporary and due to therapy is significant. If this possi-
bility is not taken into account, the patient may be unnec-
essarily discouraged. Further, treatment that is actually
effective may be stopped or changed prematurely.
CEA tests are also used to help detect recurrence of a
cancer after surgery and/or other treatment has been com-
pleted. A rising CEA level may be the first sign of cancer
return, and may show up months before other studies or
patient symptoms would raise concern. Unfortunately, this
does not always mean the recurrent cancer can be cured.
For example, only a small percentage of patients with col-
orectal cancers and rising CEA levels will benefit from
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
653