None

Efforts at prevention of Down syndrome are aimed
at genetic counseling of couples who are preparing to
have babies. A counselor needs to inform a woman that
her risk of having a baby with Down syndrome increases
with her increasing age. Two types of testing is available
during a pregnancy to determine if the baby being car-
ried has Down syndrome.
Screening tests are used to estimate the chance that
an individual woman will have a baby with Down syn-
drome. At 14–17 weeks of pregnancy, measurements of a
substance called AFP (alpha-fetoprotein) can be per-
formed. AFP is normally found circulating in the blood
of a pregnant woman, but may be unusually high or low
with certain disorders. Carrying a baby with Down syn-
drome often causes AFP to be lower than normal. This
information alone, or along with measurements of two
other hormones, is considered along with the mother’s
age to calculate the risk of the baby being born with
Down syndrome. These results are only predictions, and
are only correct about 60% of the time.
The only way to definitively establish (with about
98–99% accuracy) the presence or absence of Down syn-
drome in a developing baby, is to test tissue from the
pregnancy itself. This is usually done either by amnio-
centesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS). In amnio-
centesis, a small amount of the fluid in which the baby is
floating is withdrawn with a long, thin needle. In chori-
onic villus sampling, a tiny tube is inserted into the open-
ing of the uterus to retrieve a small sample of the placen-
ta (the organ that attaches the growing baby to the moth-
er via the umbilical cord, and provides oxygen and
nutrition). Both amniocentesis and CVS allow the
baby’s own karyotype to be determined. A couple must
then decide whether to use this information in order to
begin to prepare for the arrival of a baby with Down syn-
drome, or to terminate the pregnancy.
Once a couple has had one baby with Down syn-
drome, they are often concerned about the likelihood of
future offspring also being born with the disorder. Most
research indicates that this chance remains the same as
for any woman at a similar age. However, when the baby
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1100