None

Cognitive-behavioral therapy combines the individ-
ual goals of cognitive therapy and behavioral therapy.
Pioneered by psychologists Aaron Beck and Albert
Ellis in the 1960s, cognitive therapy assumes that mal-
adaptive behaviors and disturbed mood or emotions are
the result of inappropriate or irrational thinking patterns,
called automatic thoughts. Instead of reacting to the real-
ity of a situation, an individual reacts to his or her own
distorted viewpoint of the situation. For example, a per-
son may conclude that he is “worthless” simply because
he failed an exam or didn’t get a date. Cognitive thera-
pists attempt to make their patients aware of these dis-
torted thinking patterns, or cognitive distortions, and
change them (a process termed cognitive restructuring).
Behavioral therapy, or behavior modification, trains
individuals to replace undesirable behaviors with healthi-
er behavioral patterns. Unlike psychodynamic therapies,
it does not focus on uncovering or understanding the
unconscious motivations that may be behind the maladap-
tive behavior. In other words, strictly behavioral therapists
don’t try to find out why their patients behave the way
they do, they just teach them to change the behavior.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy integrates the cogni-
tive restructuring approach of cognitive therapy with the
behavioral modification techniques of behavioral thera-
py. The therapist works with the patient to identify both
the thoughts and the behaviors that are causing distress,
and to change those thoughts in order to readjust the
behavior. In some cases, the patient may have certain
fundamental core beliefs, called schemas, which are
flawed and require modification. For example, a patient
suffering from depression may be avoiding social contact
with others, and suffering considerable emotional dis-
tress because of his isolation. When questioned why, the
patient reveals to his therapist that he is afraid of rejec-
tion, of what others may do or say to him. Upon further
exploration with his therapist, they discover that his real
fear is not rejection, but the belief that he is hopelessly
uninteresting and unlovable. His therapist then tests the
reality of that assertion by having the patient name
friends and family who love him and enjoy his company.
By showing the patient that others value him, the thera-
pist both exposes the irrationality of the patient’s belief
and provides him with a new model of thought to change
his old behavior pattern. In this case, the person learns to
think, “I am an interesting and lovable person; therefore I
should not have difficulty making new friends in social
situations.”
If enough “irrational cognitions”
are
changed, this patient may experience considerable relief
from his depression.
A number of different techniques may be employed
in cognitive-behavioral therapy to help patients uncover
and examine their thoughts and change their behaviors.