None

Detoxification methods of healing have been used for
thousands of years. Fasting, is one of the oldest therapeu-
tic practices in medicine. Hippocrates, the ancient Greek
known as the “Father of Western medicine,” recommend-
ed fasting as a means for improving health. Ayurvedic
medicine, a traditional healing system that has developed
over thousands of years, utilizes detoxification methods
to treat many chronic conditions and to prevent illness.
Detoxification treatment has become one of the cor-
nerstones of alternative medicine. Conventional medicine
notes that environmental factors can play a significant role
in many illnesses. Environmental medicine is a field that
studies exactly how those environmental factors influence
disease. Conditions such as asthma, cancer, chronic
fatigue syndrome, multiple chemical sensitivity, and
many others are strongly influenced by exposure to toxic
or allergenic substances in the environment. The United
States Centers for Disease Control estimate that over 80%
of all illnesses have environmental and lifestyle causes.
Detoxification has also become a prominent treat-
ment as people have become more aware of environmen-
tal pollution. It is estimated that one in every four Ameri-
cans suffers from some level of heavy metal poisoning.
Heavy metals, such as lead, mercury, cadmium, and
arsenic, are by-products of industry. Synthetic agricul-
ture chemicals, many of which are known to cause health
problems, are also found in food, air, and water. Ameri-
can agriculture uses nearly 10 lb (4.5 kg) of pesticides
per person on the food supply each year. These toxins
have become almost unavoidable. Pesticides that are
used only on crops in the southern United States have
been found in the tissue of animals in the far north of
Canada. DDT, a cancer-causing insecticide that has been
banned for decades, is still regularly found in the fatty
tissue of animals, birds, and fish, even in extremely
remote regions such as the North Pole.
The problem of toxins in the environment is com-
pounded because humans are at the top of the food chain
and are more likely to be exposed to an accumulation of
toxic substances in the food supply. For instance, pesti-
cides and herbicides are sprayed on grains that are then
fed to farm animals. Toxic substances are stored in the
fatty tissue of those animals. In addition, those animals
are often injected with synthetic hormones, antibiotics,
and other chemicals. When people eat meat products,
they are exposed to the full range of chemicals and addi-
tives used along the entire agricultural chain. Detoxifica-
tion specialists call this build up of toxins bioaccumula-
tion. They assert that the bioaccumulation of toxic sub-
stances over time is responsible for many physical and
mental disorders, especially ones that are increasing
rapidly (like asthma, cancer, and mental illness). As a
result, detoxification therapies are increasing in impor-
tance and popularity.
Toxins in the body include heavy metals and various
chemicals such as pesticides, pollutants, and food addi-
tives. Drugs and alcohol have toxic effects in the body.
Toxins are produced as normal by-products in the
intestines by the bacteria that break down food. The diges-
tion of protein also creates toxic by-products in the body.
The body has natural methods of detoxification.
Individual cells get detoxified in the lymph and circula-
tory system. The liver is the principle organ of detoxifi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1041