None

Esophageal cancer usually originates in the inner
layers of the lining of the esophagus and grows outward.
In time, the tumor can obstruct the passage of food and
liquid, making swallowing painful and difficult. Since
most patients are not diagnosed until the late stages of
the disease, esophageal cancer is associated with poor
quality of life and low survival rates.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common type
of esophageal cancer, accounting for 95% of all
esophageal cancers worldwide. The esophagus is nor-
mally lined with thin, flat squamous cells that resemble
tiny roof shingles. Squamous cell carcinoma can develop
at any point along the esophagus but is most common in
the middle portion.
Adenocarcinoma has surpassed squamous cell carci-
noma as the most common type of esophageal cancer in
the United States. Adenocarcinoma originates in glandu-
lar tissue not normally present in the lining of the esoph-
agus. Before adenocarcinoma can develop, glandular
cells must replace a section of squamous cells. This
occurs in Barrett’s esophagus, a precancerous condition
in which chronic acid reflux from the stomach stimulates
a transformation in cell type in the lower portion of the
esophagus.
A very small fraction of esophageal cancers are
melanomas, sarcomas, or lymphomas.
There is great variability in the incidence of
esophageal cancer with regard to geography, ethnicity,
and gender. The overall incidence is increasing. About
13,000 new cases of esophageal cancer are diagnosed in
the United States each year. During the same 12-month
period, 12,000 people die of this disease. It strikes
between five and ten North Americans per 100,000. In
some areas of China the cancer is endemic.
Squamous cell carcinoma usually occurs in the sixth
or seventh decade of life, with a greater incidence in
African-Americans than in others. Adenocarcinoma
develops earlier and is much more common in white
patients. In general, esophageal cancer occurs more fre-
quently in men than in women.