None

vehicular failure was a predisposing factor in
15% of the Saskatchewan cases.
Three nearly simultaneous physiological processes
underlie frostbite injury: tissue freezing, tissue hypoxia, and
the release of inflammatory mediators. Tissue freezing
causes ice crystal formation and other changes that damage
and eventually kill cells. Much of this harm occurs because
the ice produces pressure changes that cause water (crucial
for cell survival) to flow out of the cells. Tissue hypoxia
(oxygen deficiency) occurs when the blood vessels in the
hands, feet, and other extremities narrow in response to
cold. Among its many tasks, blood transfers body heat to the
skin, which then dissipates the heat into the environment.
Blood vessel narrowing is the body’s way of protecting vital
internal organs at the expense of the extremities by reducing
heat flow away from the core. However, blood also carries
life-sustaining oxygen to the skin and other tissues, and nar-
rowed vessels result in oxygen starvation. Narrowing also
causes acidosis (an increase in tissue acidity) and increases
blood viscosity (thickness). Ultimately, blood stops flowing
through the capillaries (the tiny blood vessels that connect
the arteries and veins) and blood clots form in the arterioles
and venules (the smallest arteries and veins). Damage also
occurs to the endothelial cells that line the blood vessels.
Hypoxia, blood clots, and endothelial damage lead, in turn,
to the release of inflammatory mediators (substances that
act as links in the inflammatory process), which promote
further endothelial damage, hypoxia, and cell destruction.
Frostbite is classified by degree of injury (first, sec-
ond, third, or fourth), or simply divided into two types,
superficial (corresponding to first- or second-degree
injury) and deep (corresponding to third- or fourth-degree
injury). Most frostbite injuries affect the feet or hands. The
remaining 10% of cases typically involve the ears, nose,
cheeks, or penis. Once frostbite sets in, the affected part
begins to feel cold and, usually, numb; this is followed by
a feeling of clumsiness. The skin turns white or yellowish.
Many patients experience severe pain in the affected part
during rewarming treatment and an intense throbbing pain
that arises two or three days later and can last days or
weeks. As the skin begins to thaw during treatment,
edema (excess tissue fluid) often accumulates, causing
swelling. In second- and higher-degree frostbite, blisters
appear. Third-degree cases produce deep, blood-filled blis-
ters and, during the second week, a hard black eschar
(scab). Fourth-degree frostbite penetrates below the skin to
the muscles, tendons, nerves, and bones. In severe cases of
frostbite the dead tissue can mummify and drop off. Infec-
tion is also a possibility.