For patients taking the kinds of diuretics that rob
potassium from the body, physicians may recommend
adding potassium-rich foods or drinks, such as citrus fruits
and juices, to the diet. Or they may suggest taking a potas-
sium supplement or taking another medicine that keeps the
body from losing too much potassium. If the physician
recommends any of these measures, be sure to closely fol-
low his or her directions. Do not make other diet changes
without checking with the physician. People who are tak-
ing potassium-sparing diuretics should not add potassium
to their diets, as too much potassium may be harmful.
People who take diuretics may lose too much water
or potassium when they get sick, especially if they have
severe vomiting and diarrhea. They should check with
their physicians if they become ill.
These medicines make some people feel lighthead-
ed, dizzy, or faint when they get up after sitting or lying
down. Older people are especially likely to have this
problem. Drinking alcohol, exercising, standing for long
periods, or being in hot weather may make the problem
worse. To lessen the problem, get up gradually and hold
onto something for support if possible. Avoid drinking
too much alcohol and be careful in hot weather or when
exercising or standing for a long time.
Anyone who is taking a diuretic should be sure to
tell the health care professional in charge before having
surgical or dental procedures, medical tests or emergency
treatment.
Some diuretics make the skin more sensitive to sun-
light. Even brief exposure to sun can cause a severe sun-
burn, itching, a rash, redness, or other changes in skin
color. While being treated with this medicine, avoid
being in direct sunlight, especially between 10 a.m. and 3
p.m.; wear a hat and tightly woven clothing that covers
the arms and legs; use a sunscreen with a skin protection
factor (SPF) of at least 15; protect the lips with a sun
block lipstick; and do not use tanning beds, tanning
booths, or sunlamps. People with fair skin may need to
use a sunscreen with a higher skin protection factor.

None