None

Amblyopia—Decreased visual acuity, usually in
one eye, in the absence of any structural abnormali-
ty in the eye.
Conjunctiva—The mucous membrane that covers the
white part of the eyes (sclera) and lines the eyelids.
Cornea—Clear outer covering of the front of the eye.
Floaters—Translucent specks that float across the
visual field, due to small objects floating in the vit-
reous humor.
Fundus—The inside of an organ. In the eye, refers to
the back area that can be seen with the ophthalmo-
scope.
Glaucoma—There are many types of glaucoma.
Glaucoma results in optic nerve damage and a
decreased visual field and blindness if not treated. It
is usually associated with increased IOP, but that is
not always the case. The three factors associated
with glaucoma are increased IOP, a change in the
optic nerve head, and changes in the visual field.
Gonioscope—An instrument used to inspect the
eye (e.g., the anterior chamber). It consists of a
magnifier and a lens equipped with mirrors; it’s
placed on the patient’s cornea.
Iris—The colored ring just behind the cornea and in
front of the lens that controls the amount of light
sent to the retina.
Macula—The central part of the retina where the
rods and cones are densest.
Ophthalmoscope—An instrument designed to view
structures in the back of the eye.
Optic nerve—The nerve that carries visual mes-
sages from the retina to the brain.
Pupil—The circular opening that looks like a black
hole in the middle of the iris.
Retina—The inner, light-sensitive layer of the eye
containing rods and cones; transforms the image it
receives into electrical messages which are then
sent to the brain via the optic nerve.
Sclera—The tough, fibrous, white outer protective
covering that surrounds the eye.
Slit lamp—A microscope that projects a linear slit
beam of light onto the eye; allows viewing of the
conjunctiva, cornea, iris, aqueous humor, lens, and
eyelid.
Tonometer—An instrument that measures intraocu-
lar pressure (IOP).
Ultrasonography—A method of obtaining structural
information about internal tissues and organs where
an image is produced because different tissues
bounce back ultrasonic waves differently.
binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy,
gonioscopy,
color tests, contrast sensitivity testing, ultasonogra-
phy, and others. The patient may have to return for
additional visits.