None

People who have certain medical conditions or who
are taking certain other medicines may have problems if
they take diuretics. Before taking these drugs, be sure to
let the physician know about any of these conditions:
ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reac-
tions to diuretics or sulfonamides (sulfa drugs) in the
past should let his or her physician know before using
a diuretic. The physician should also be told about any
allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other sub-
stances.
PREGNANCY. Diuretics will not help the swelling of
hands and feet that some women have during
pregnancy. In general, pregnant women should not use
diuretics unless a physician recommends their use.
Although studies have not been done on pregnant
women, studies of laboratory animals show that some
diuretics can cause harmful effects when taken during
pregnancy.
BREASTFEEDING. Some diuretics pass into breast
milk, but no reports exist of problems in nursing babies
whose mothers use this medicine. However, thiazide
diuretics may decrease the flow of breast milk. Women
who are breastfeeding and need to use a diuretic should
check with their physicians.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Side effects of
some diuretics may be more likely in people who have
had a recent heart attack or who have liver disease or
severe kidney disease. Other diuretics may not work
properly in people with liver disease or severe kidney
disease. Diuretics may worsen certain medical condi-
tions, such as gout, kidney stones, pancreatitis, lupus
erythematosus, and hearing problems. In addition, peo-
ple with diabetes should be aware that diuretics may
increase blood sugar levels. People with heart or blood
vessel disease should know that some diuretics increase
cholesterol or triglyceride levels. The risk of an allergic
reaction to certain diuretics is greater in people with
bronchial asthma. Before using diuretics, people with
any of these medical problems should make sure their
physicians are aware of their conditions. Also, people
who have trouble urinating or who have high potassium
levels in their blood may not be able to take diuretics and
should check with a physician before using them.
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking diuretics with
certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs work or
may increase the chance of side effects.