None

Mania—A mood disorder in which a person expe-
riences prolonged elation or irritability character-
ized by overactivity that can lead to exhaustion
and medical emergencies.
Relapse—A return of the signs and symptoms of
an illness.
Schizophrenia—A severe mental illness in which
a person has difficulty distinguishing what is real
from what is not real. It is often characterized by
hallucinations, delusions, and withdrawal from
people and social activities.
pose. The usual dose of electricity is 70–150 volts for
0.1–0.5 seconds. In the first stage of the seizure (tonic
phase), the muscles in the body that have not been para-
lyzed by medication contract for a period of five to 15
seconds. This is followed by the second stage (clonic
phase) that is characterized by twitching movements,
usually visible only in the toes or in a non-paralyzed arm
or leg. These are caused by alternating contraction and
relaxation of these same muscles. This stage lasts
approximately 10–60 seconds. The entire procedure,
from beginning to end, lasts about 30 minutes.
The total number of treatments a patient will receive
depends upon many factors such as age, diagnosis, the
history of illness, family support, and response to thera-
py. Patients with depression, for example, usually require
six to 12 treatments. Treatments are usually administered
every other day, three times a week.
The electrodes may be placed on both sides of the
head (bilateral) or one side (unilateral). While bilateral
ECT appears to be somewhat more effective, unilateral
ECT is preferred for individuals who experience pro-
longed confusion or forgetfulness following treatment.
Many doctors begin treatment with unilateral ECT, then
change to bilateral if the patient is not improving.
Post-treatment confusion and forgetfulness are com-
mon, though disturbing symptoms associated with ECT.
Doctors and nurses must be patient and supportive by
providing patients with factual information about recov-
ery. Elderly patients, for example, may become increas-
ingly confused and forgetful as the treatments continue.
These symptoms usually subside with time, but a small
minority of patients state that they have never fully
recovered from these effects.
With the introduction of antipsychotics in the 1950s, the
use of ECT became less frequent. These new medications
provided relief for untold thousands of patients who suffered
greatly from their illness. However, there are a number of
side effects associated with these drugs, some of which are
irreversible. Another drawback is that some medications do
not produce a therapeutic effect for two to six weeks. During
this time the patient may present a danger to himself or oth-
ers. In addition, there are patients who do not respond to
medicine or who have severe allergic reactions. For these
individuals, ECT may be the only treatment that will help.