Surgery is the removal of a visible tumor and is the
most frequently used cancer treatment. It is most effec-
tive when a cancer is small and confined to one area of
the body.
Surgery can be used for many purposes.
• Treatment. Treatment of cancer by surgery involves
removal of the tumor to cure the disease. This is typical-
ly done when the cancer is localized to a discrete area.
Along with the cancer, some part of the normal sur-
rounding tissue is also removed to ensure that no cancer
cells remain in the area. Since cancer usually spreads
via the lymphatic system, adjoining lymph nodes may
be examined and sometimes they are removed as well.
• Preventive surgery. Preventive or prophylactic surgery
involves removal of an abnormal looking area that is
likely to become malignant over time. For example,
40% of the people with a colon disease known as ulcer-
ative colitis, ultimately die of colon cancer. Rather than
live with the fear of developing colon cancer, these peo-
ple may choose to have their colons removed and
reduce the risk significantly.
• Diagnostic purposes. The most definitive tool for diag-
nosing cancer is a biopsy. Sometimes, a biopsy can be
performed by inserting a needle through the skin. How-
ever, at other times, the only way to obtain some tissue
sample for biopsy is by performing a surgical operation.
• Cytoreductive surgery is a procedure where the doctor
removes as much of the cancer as possible, and then
treats the remaining with radiation therapy or chemo-
therapy or both.
• Palliative surgery is aimed at curing the symptoms, not
the cancer. Usually, in such cases, the tumor is so large or
has spread so much that removing the entire tumor is not
an option. For example, a tumor in the abdomen may be
so large that it may press on and block a portion of the
intestine, interfering with digestion and causing pain and
vomiting. “Debulking surgery” may remove a part of the
blockage and relieve the symptoms. In tumors that are
dependent on hormones, removal of the organs that
secrete the hormones is an option. For example, in
prostate cancer, the release of testosterone by the testi-
cles stimulates the growth of cancerous cells. Hence, a
man may undergo an “orchiectomy” (removal of testi-
cles) to slow the progress of the disease. Similarly, in a
type of aggressive breast cancer, removal of the ovaries
(oophorectomy) will stop the synthesis of hormones
from the ovaries and slow the progression of the cancer.

None