None

Treatments for Crohn’s disease try to reduce the
underlying inflammation, the resulting malabsorption/
malnutrition, the uncomfortable symptoms of crampy
abdominal pain and diarrhea, and the possible complica-
tions (obstructions, abscesses, and fistulas).
Inflammation can be treated with a drug called sul-
fasalazine. Sulfasalazine is made up of two parts. One part
is related to the sulfa antibiotics; the other part is a form
of the anti-inflammatory chemical, salicylic acid (related
to aspirin). Sulfasalazine is not well absorbed from the
intestine, so it stays mostly within the intestine, where it is
broken down into its components. It is believed that the
salicylic acid component actively treats Crohn’s disease by
fighting inflammation. Some patients do not respond to
sulfasalazine, and require steroid medications (such as
prednisone). Steroids, however, must be used carefully to
avoid the complications of these drugs, including
increased risk of infection and weakening of bones (osteo-
porosis). Some very potent immunosuppressive drugs,
which interfere with the products of the immune system
and can hopefully decrease inflammation, may be used for
those patients who do not improve on steroids.
A new drug called infliximab (Remicade) appears to
be a powerful treatment for Crohn’s disease, particularly
for patients who have not responded well to other forms
of treatment. Infliximab is administered through infusion,
and consists of a monoclonal antibody that interferes with
the inflammatory process mediated by tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-a). Patients taking infliximab seem to
be able to decrease their use of steroid medications, and
require fewer surgical interventions. Furthermore, inflix-
imab is the first medication approved for treating fistulas.
Unfortunately, infliximab can only be used on a short-
term basis, because its interference with TNF-a activity
can also predispose patients to serious infection. More
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
958
Crohn’s disease
research is needed to try to harness the benefits of inflix-
imab, while avoiding the potential complications.
Serious cases of malabsorption/malnutrition may
need to be treated by providing nutritional supplements.
These supplements must be in a form that can be
absorbed from the damaged, inflamed intestine. Some
patients find that certain foods are hard to digest, includ-
ing milk, large quantities of fiber, and spicy foods. When
patients are suffering from an obstruction, or during peri-
ods of time when symptoms of the disease are at their
worst, they may need to drink specially formulated, high-
calorie liquid supplements. Those patients who are
severely ill may need to receive their nutrition through a
needle inserted in a vein (intravenously), or even by a
tiny tube (a catheter) inserted directly into a major vein
in the chest.
A number of medications are available to help
decrease the cramping and pain associated with Crohn’s
disease. These include loperamide, tincture of opium,
and codeine. Some fiber preparations (methylcellulose or
psyllium) may be helpful, although some patients do not
tolerate them well.
The first step in treating an obstruction involves gen-
eral attempts to decrease inflammation with sul-
fasalazine, steroids, or immunosuppressive drugs. A
patient with a severe obstruction will have to stop taking
all food and drink by mouth, allowing the bowel to
“rest.” Abscesses and other infections will require antibi-
otics. Surgery may be required to repair an obstruction
that does not resolve on its own, to remove an abscess, or
to repair a fistula. Such surgery may involve the removal
of a section of the intestine. In extremely severe cases of
Crohn’s disease that do not respond to treatment, a
patient may need to have the entire large intestine
removed (an operation called a colectomy). In this case,
a piece of the remaining small intestine is pulled through
an opening in the abdomen. This bit of intestine is fash-
ioned surgically to allow a special bag to be placed over
it. This bag catches the body’s waste, which no longer
can be passed through the large intestine and out of the
anus. This opening, which will remain in place for life, is
called an ileostomy.