None

bloodstream. The presence of the virus within the blood
vessels, especially those feeding the skin, causes changes
to these blood vessels. The vessels swell and leak. The
spleen and lymph nodes become enlarged, and patches of
liver tissue die. A process called disseminated intravascu-
lar coagulation (DIC) occurs, where chemicals responsi-
ble for clotting are used up and lead to a risk of severe
bleeding (hemorrhage).
After the virus has been transmitted to the human
host, a period of incubation occurs. During this time (last-
ing about five to eight days) the virus multiplies. Symp-
toms of the disease appear suddenly and include high
fever, chills, headache, eye pain, red eyes, enlarged
lymph nodes, a red flush to the face, lower back pain,
extreme weakness, and severe aches in the legs and joints.
This initial period of illness lasts about two–three
days. After this time, the fever drops rapidly and the
patient sweats heavily. After about a day of feeling rela-
tively well, the patient’s temperature increases again,
although not as much as the first time. A rash of small
red bumps begins on the arms and legs, spreading to the
chest, abdomen, and back. It rarely affects the face. The
palms of the hands and the soles of the feet become
swollen and turn bright red. The characteristic combina-
tion of fever, rash, and headache are called the “dengue
triad.” Most people recover fully from dengue fever,
although weakness and fatigue may last for several
weeks. Once a person has been infected with dengue
fever, his or her immune system keeps producing cells
that prevent reinfection for about a year.
More severe illness may occur in some people.
These people may be experiencing dengue fever for the
first time. However, in some cases a person may have
already had dengue fever at one time, recovered, and
then is reinfected with the virus. In these cases, the first
infection teaches the immune system to recognize the
presence of the arbovirus. When the immune cells
encounter the virus during later infections, the immune
system over-reacts. These types of illnesses, called
dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) or dengue shock syn-
drome (DSS), involve more severe symptoms. Fever and
headache are the first symptoms, but the other initial
symptoms of dengue fever are absent. The patient devel-
ops a cough, followed by the appearance of small pur-
plish spots (petechiae) on the skin. These petechiae are
areas where blood is leaking out of the vessels. Large
bruised areas appear as the bleeding worsens and abdom-
inal pain may be severe. The patient may begin to vomit
a substance that looks like coffee grounds. This is actual-
ly a sign of bleeding into the stomach. As the blood ves-
sels become more damaged, they leak more and continue
to increase in diameter (dilate), causing a decrease in
blood flow to all tissues of the body. This state of low
blood flow is called shock. Shock can result in damage to
the body’s organs (especially the heart and kidneys)
because low blood flow deprives them of oxygen.