Bipolar disorder—A severe mental illness in
which a person has extreme mood swings, ranging
from a highly excited state—sometimes with a
false sense of well-being—to depression
Bone marrow—Soft tissue that fills the hollow
centers of bones. Blood cells and platelets (disk-
shaped bodies in the blood that are important in
clotting) are produced in the bone marrow.
Hallucination—A false or distorted perception of
objects, sounds, or events that seems real. Hallucina-
tions usually result from drugs or mental disorders.
Immune system—The body’s natural defenses
against disease and infection.
Inflammation—Pain, redness, swelling, and heat
that usually develop in response to injury or illness.
Schizophrenia—A severe mental disorder in
which people lose touch with reality and may
have illogical thoughts, delusions, hallucinations,
behavioral problems and other disturbances.
Sickle cell anemia—An inherited disorder in which
red blood cells contain an abnormal form of hemo-
globin, a protein that carries oxygen. The abnormal
form of hemoglobin causes the red cells to become
sickle- or crescent-shaped. The misshapen cells
may clog blood vessels, preventing oxygen from
reaching tissues and leading to pain, blood clots
and other problems. Sickle cell anemia is most
common in people of African descent and in peo-
ple from Italy, Greece, India, and the Middle East.
or lying down. Getting up gradually and holding onto
something for support should lessen the problem.
In laboratory studies, giving high doses of dronabi-
nol to pregnant animals increased the risk of the unborn
baby’s death. The medicine’s effects on pregnant women
have not been studied. Women who are pregnant or who
may become pregnant should check with their physicians
before taking this medicine.
Dronabinol passes into breast milk and may affect
nursing babies whose mothers take the medicine. Women
who are breastfeeding their babies should check with
their physicians before using dronabinol.
Because of its possible mind-altering effects, dron-
abinol should be used with care in children and older
people. Both children and older people should be
watched carefully when they are taking this medicine.
Using dronabinol may worsen some medical condi-
tions, including high blood pressure, heart disease, bipo-
lar disorder and schizophrenia.
General precautions for all types of supportive
cancer therapy
Anyone who previously has had unusual reactions to
drugs used in supportive cancer therapy should let his or
her physician know before taking the drugs again. The
physician should also be told about any allergies to
foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances.

None