This 40-year-old male is working out on a treadmill, moni-
tored by his physician, following heart surgery. (Custom
Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
sions, and patients are taught how to measure their
heart rate and evaluate any possible cardiac symptoms
during each session. Patients with advanced coronary
disease may require continuous ECG monitoring
throughout their exercise sessions. Once discharged
from the hospital, the patient works with his cardiac
team to create an individual exercise plan.
• Diet. Cardiac patients will work with a nutritionist or
dietician to develop a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet
plan. Patients with high blood pressure may be put on a
salt-restricted diet and instructed to limit alcohol
intake. Weight loss may also be a goal with obese car-
diac patients.
• Counseling. A psychologist or social worker can help
cardiac patients with issues that may be contributing to
their heart condition, such as stress and anxiety. Relax-
ation techniques may be taught to patients to help them
deal with these feelings. Cardiac patients frequently
experience a period of depression, and group or indi-
vidual counseling can be beneficial in overcoming
these feelings. Vocational counselors can assist cardiac
patients in returning to the workforce.
• Education. The patient and family should be fully edu-
cated on the physical limitations of the patient, his rec-
ommended diet and exercise plan, his emotional status,
and the lifestyle changes required to improve the
patient’s overall health.
• Smoking cessation. Cardiac patients who smoke are
twice as likely to have a heart attack in the following
five years than non-smoking patients. These patients
are strongly encouraged to enroll in a smoking cessa-
tion program, which typically includes patient educa-
tion and behavioral counseling. Nicotine replacement
therapy, which uses nicotine patches, nose spray, or
gum to wean patients off of cigarettes, may also be part
of the program. Antidepressants and anti-anxiety med-
ication may be helpful in some cases.

None