There is no single known cause for CFS. Studies
have pointed to several different conditions that might be
responsible. These include:
• viral infections
• chemical toxins
• allergies
• immune abnormalities
• psychological disorders
Although the cause is still controversial, many doc-
tors and researchers now think that CFS may not be a
single illness. Instead, they think CFS may be a group of
symptoms caused by several conditions. One theory is
that a microorganism, such as a virus, or a chemical
injures the body and damages the immune system, allow-
ing dormant viruses to become active. About 90% of all
people have a virus in the herpes family dormant (not
actively growing or reproducing) in their bodies since
childhood. When these viruses start growing again, the
immune system may overreact and produce chemicals
called cytokines that can cause flu-like symptoms.
Immune abnormalities have been found in studies of
people with CFS, although the same abnormalities are
also found in people with allergies, autoimmune dis-
eases, cancer, and other disorders.
The role of psychological problems in CFS is very
controversial. Because many people with CFS are diag-
nosed with depression and other psychiatric disorders,
some experts conclude that the symptoms of CFS are
psychological. However, many people with CFS did not
have psychological disorders before getting the illness.
Many doctors think that patients become depressed or
anxious because of the effects of the symptoms of their
CFS. One recent study concluded that depression was the
result of CFS and was not its cause.
Having CFS is not just a matter of being tired. Peo-
ple with CFS have severe fatigue that keeps them from
performing their normal daily activities. They find it dif-
ficult or impossible to work, attend school, or even to
take part in social activities. They may have sleep distur-
bances that keep them from getting enough rest or they
may sleep too much. Many people with CFS feel just as
tired after a full night’s sleep as before they went to bed.
When they exercise or try to be active in spite of their
fatigue, people with CFS experience what some patients
call “payback”—debilitating exhaustion that can confine
them to bed for days.

None