Celiac disease occurs when the body reacts abnor-
mally to gluten, a protein found in wheat, rye, barley, and
possibly oats. When someone with celiac disease eats
foods containing gluten, that person’s immune system
causes an inflammatory response in the small intestine,
which damages the tissues and results in impaired ability
to absorb nutrients from foods. The inflammation and
malabsorption create wide-ranging problems in many
systems of the body. Since the body’s own immune sys-
tem causes the damage, celiac disease is classified as an
“autoimmune” disorder. Celiac disease may also be called
sprue, nontropical sprue, gluten sensitive enteropathy,
celiac sprue, and adult celiac disease.
Celiac disease may be discovered at any age, from
infancy through adulthood. The disorder is more com-
monly found among white Europeans or in people of
European descent. It is very unusual to find celiac dis-
ease in African or Asian people. The exact incidence of
the disease is uncertain. Estimates vary from one in
5000, to as many as one in every 300 individuals with
this background. The prevalence of celiac disease seems
to be different from one European country to another,
and between Europe and the United States. This may be
due to differences in diet and/or unrecognized disease. A
recent study of random blood samples tested for celiac
disease in the US showed one in 250 testing positive. It is
clearly underdiagnosed, probably due to the symptoms
being attributed to another problem, or lack of knowl-
edge about celiac disease by physicians and laboratories.
Because of the known genetic component, relatives of
patients with celiac disease are considered at higher risk
for the disorder.
Because celiac disease has a hereditary influence,
close relatives (especially first degree relatives, such as
children, siblings, and parents) have a higher risk of
being affected with the condition. The chance that a first
degree relative of someone with celiac disease will have
the disease is about 10%.
As more is learned about celiac disease, it becomes
evident that it has many variations which may not pro-
duce typical symptoms. It may even be clinically “silent,”
where no obvious problems related to the disease are
apparent.

None