Allergic reaction—An inappropriate or exaggerat-
ed genetically determined reaction to a chemical
that occurs only on the second or subsequent
exposures to the offending agent, after the first
contact has sensitized the body.
Corticosteriod—A group of synthetic hormones
that are used to prevent or reduce inflammation.
Toxic effects may result from rapid withdrawal after
prolonged use or from continued use of large doses.
Patch test—A skin test that is done to identify aller-
gens. A suspected substance is applied to the skin.
After 24–48 hours, if the area is red and swollen,
the test is positive for that substance. If no reaction
occurs, another substance is applied. This is con-
tinued until the patient experiences an allergic
reaction where the irritant was applied to the skin.
Rash—A spotted, pink or red skin eruption that
may be accompanied by itching and is caused by
disease, contact with an allergen, food ingestion,
or drug reaction.
Ulcer—An open sore on the skin, resulting from
tissue destruction, that is usually accompanied by
redness, pain, or infection.
Patients who have a history of dermatitis should
remove their rings before washing their hands. They
should use bath oils or glycerine-based soaps and bathe
in lukewarm saltwater.
Patting rather than rubbing the skin after bathing and
thoroughly massaging lubricating lotion or nonprescrip-
tion cortisone creams into still-damp skin can soothe red,
irritated nummular dermatitis. Highly concentrated corti-
sone preparations should not be applied to the face,
armpits, groin, or rectal area. Periodic medical monitoring
is necessary to detect side effects in patients who use such
preparations on rashes covering large areas of the body.
Coal-tar salves can help relieve symptoms of num-
mular dermatitis that have not responded to other treat-
ments, but these ointments have an unpleasant odor and
stain clothing.
Patients who have stasis dermatitis should elevate
their legs as often as possible and sleep with a pillow
between the lower legs.
Tar or zinc paste may also be used to treat stasis der-
matitis. Because these compounds must remain in con-
tact with the rash for as long as two weeks, the paste and
bandages must be applied by a nurse or a doctor.
Coal-tar shampoos may be used for seborrheic der-
matitis that occurs on the scalp. Sun exposure after the
use of these shampoos should be avoided because the
risk of sunburn of the scalp is increased.

None