The doctor checks the pupil’s response to light (if it
dilates and constricts appropriately). The iris is viewed
for symmetry and physical appearance. The iris is
checked more thoroughly later using a slit lamp.
Refractive error determination-Refraction
The examiner will determine the refractive error and
obtain a prescription for corrective lenses for people
whose visual acuity is less than 20/20. An instrument
called a phoropter, which the patient sits behind, is gen-
erally used (sometimes the refraction can be done with a
trial frame that the patient wears). The phoropter is
equipped with many lenses that allow the examiner to
test many combinations of corrections to learn which
correction allows the patient to see the eye chart most
clearly. This is the part of the exam when the doctor usu-
ally says, “Which is better, one or two?” The phoropter
also contains prisms, and sometimes the doctor will
intentionally make the patient see double. This may help
in determining a slight eye turn. The exam will check
vision at distance and near (reading).
A prescription for corrective lenses can also be sup-
plied by automated refracting devices, which measure
the necessary refraction by shining a light into the eye
and observing the reflected light. Another objective way
to obtain a prescription is using a hand-held retinoscope.
As in the automated method just mentioned, the doctor
shines a light in the patient’s eyes and can determine an
objective prescription. This is helpful in young children
or infants.
Sometimes drops will be instilled in the patient’s eyes
before this part of the exam. The drops may relax accom-
modation so that the refraction will be more accurate. This
is helpful in children and people who are farsighted.
After the refraction and other visual status tests, for
example color tests or binocularity tests (can the patient see
3-D, or have depth perception), the doctor will check the
health of the eyes and surrounding areas. The main instru-
ments used are the ophthalmoscope and the slit lamp.

None