The cholesterol test is a quantitative analysis of the
cholesterol levels in a sample of the patient’s blood. Total
serum cholesterol (TC) is the measurement routinely taken.
Doctors sometimes order a complete lipoprotein profile to
better evaluate the risk for atherosclerosis (coronary
artery disease, or CAD). The full lipoprotein profile also
includes measurements of triglyceride levels (a chemical
compound that forms 95% of the fats and oils stored in ani-
mal or vegetable cells) and lipoproteins (high density and
low density). Blood fats are also called “lipids.”
The type of cholesterol in the blood is as important as
the total quantity. Cholesterol is a fatty substance and can-
not be dissolved in water. It must combine with a protein
molecule called a lipoprotein in order to be transported in
the blood. There are five major types of lipoproteins in the
human body; they differ in the amount of cholesterol that
they carry in comparison to other fats and fatty acids, and
in their functions in the body. Lipoproteins are classified,
as follows, according to their density:
• Chylomicrons. These are normally found in the blood
only after a person has eaten foods containing fats.
They contain about 7% cholesterol. Chylomicrons
transport fats and cholesterol from the intestine into the
liver and then into the bloodstream. They are metabo-
lized in the process of carrying food energy to muscle
and fat cells.
• Very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL). These lipopro-
teins carry mostly triglycerides, but they also contain
16–22% cholesterol. VLDLs are made in the liver and
eventually become IDL particles after they have lost
their triglyceride content.
• Intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL). IDLs are
short-lived lipoproteins containing about 30% choles-
terol that are converted in the liver to low-density
lipoproteins (LDLs).
• Low-density lipoproteins (LDL). LDL molecules carry
cholesterol from the liver to other body tissues. They
contain about 50% cholesterol. Extra LDLs are absorbed
by the liver and their cholesterol is excreted into the bile.
LDL particles are involved in the formation of plaques
(abnormal deposits of cholesterol) in the walls of the
coronary arteries. LDL is known as “bad cholesterol.”
• High-density lipoproteins (HDL). HDL molecules are
made in the intestines and the liver. HDLs are about
50% protein and 19% cholesterol. They help to remove
cholesterol from artery walls. Lifestyle changes,
including exercising, keeping weight within recom-
mended limits, and giving up smoking can increase the
body’s levels of HDL cholesterol. HDL is known as
“good cholesterol.”
Because of the difference in density and cholesterol
content of lipoproteins, two patients with the same total
cholesterol level can have very different lipid profiles
and different risk for CAD. The critical factor is the level
of HDL cholesterol in the blood serum. Some doctors
use the ratio of the total cholesterol level to HDL choles-
terol when assessing the patient’s degree of risk. A low
TC/HDL ratio is associated with a lower degree of risk.

None