None

When first exposed to CMV, a person’s immune sys-
tem is triggered and quickly makes antibodies to fight the
virus. Antibodies are special proteins designed to attack
and destroy foreign material, in this case, the cytomega-
lovirus.
The test combines a person’s serum with a substance
to which CMV antibodies attach. This antibody-antigen
complex is measured and the amount of original anti-
body determined. If positive for antibodies, the serum is
diluted, or titered, and the test repeated until the serum is
so dilute it no longer gives a positive result. The last dilu-
tion that gives a positive result is the titer reported.
A test positive for CMV antibodies means the per-
son has been infected with the virus, either currently or
in the past; it doesn’t mean the person has lifetime immu-
nity. After an infection, this virus, like all members of the
herpes virus group, can stay hidden inside a person and
cause infection if the person’s immune system later
weakens and antibody protection decreases. In fact, reac-
tivation of such hidden (or latent) infection is not at all
uncommon and usually occurs without symptoms.
Transplant patients and people with weakened
immune systems, including those with HIV, are vulnera-
ble to infection from several routes, including from
another person, from a donated organ or transfused
blood, or from reactivation of a past infection. Before
transplant, both the recipient and donor are usually tested
for antibodies. A recipient who has never had CMV (neg-
ative for antibodies), should not receive an organ from a
donor who has had CMV (positive for antibodies). CVM
infection can be associated with organ rejection, or can
cause illness such as pneumonia, hepatitis, or death.
Similarly, blood is usually screened for CMV antibodies
before being transfused into a person with a weakened
immune system.
CMV infection is the most common congenital
infection (existing at birth). The infection, passed from
mother to baby, can cause permanent mental or physical
damage, or death. The antibody screening test tells a
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
998