Digitalis—A naturally occuring compound used in
the preparation of the medication, digoxin, pre-
scribed to increase the heart rate and strengthen
the force of the heart’s contractions.
Diuretics—Medications used in the treatment of
fluid overload, to promote excretion of sodium
and water.
Interstitial spaces—Areas of the body occuring
outside the vessels or organs, between the cells.
Pitting edema—A swelling in the tissue under the
skin, resulting from fluid accumulation, that is
measured by the depth of indentation made by fin-
ger pressure over a boney prominence.
• Massage. Massaging the body part can help to stimu-
late the release of excess fluids, but should be avoided
if the patient has blood clots in the veins.
• Travel breaks. Sitting for long periods will increase
swelling in the feet and ankles. Standing and/or walk-
ing at least every hour or two will help stimulate blood
flow.
The three “Ds”—diuretics, digitalis, and diet—are
frequently prescribed for medical conditions that result
in excess fluid volume. Diuretics are medications that
promote urination of sodium and water. Digoxin is a dig-
italis preparation that is sometimes needed to decrease
heart rate and increase the strength of the heart’s contrac-
tions. Dietary recommendations include less sodium in
order to decrease fluid retention. Consideration of ade-
quate protein intake is also made.
For patients with lymphedema, a combination of
therapies may prove effective. Combined decongestive
therapy includes the use of manual lymph drainage
(MLD), compression bandaging, garments and pumps,
and physical therapy. MLD involves the use of light
massage of the subcutaneous tissue where the lymph
vessels predominate. Massage begins in an area of the
body trunk where there is normal lymph function and
proceeds to areas of lymphatic insufficiency, in an
effort to stimulate new drainage tract development.
(MLD should not be used for patients with active can-
cer, deep vein clots, congestive heart failure, or cel-
lulitis.) MLD sessions are followed by application of
compression garments or pumps. Physical therapy is
aimed at strengthening the affected limb and increas-
ing joint mobility.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1135

None