None Over 140 million people in the United States wear eyeglasses. People whose eyes have refractive errors do not see clearly without glasses, because the light emitted from the objects they are observing does not come into focus on their retinas. For people who are farsighted, images come into focus behind the retina; for people who are nearsight- ed, images come into focus in front of the retina. LENSES. Lenses work by changing the direction of light so that images come into focus on the retina. The greater the index of refraction of the lens material and the greater the difference in the curvature between the two surfaces of the lens, the greater the change in direction of light that passes through it, and the greater the correction. Lenses can be unifocal, with one correction for all distances, or they can be correct for more than one dis- tance (multifocal). One type of multifocal, the bifocal, has an area of the lens (usually at the bottom) that cor- rects for nearby objects (about 14 in from the eyes); the remainder of the lens corrects for distant objects (about 20 ft from the eyes). Another type of multifocal, a trifo- cal, has an area in-between that corrects for intermedi- ate distances (usually about 28 in). Conventional bifo- cals and trifocals have visible lines between the areas of different correction; however, lenses where the correc- tion gradually changes from one area to the other, with- out visible lines, have been available since the 1970s. Such lenses are sometimes called progressives or no- line bifocals. To be suitable for eyeglass lenses, a material must be transparent, without bubbles, and have a high index of refraction. The greater the index of refraction, the thinner the lens can be. Lenses are made from either glass or plastic (hard resin). The advantage of plastic is that it is lightweight and more impact resistant than glass. The advantage of glass is that it is scratch resistant and pro- vides the clearest possible vision. Glass was the first material to be used for eyeglass lenses, and was used for several hundred years before plastic was introduced. The crown glass used for eye- glass lenses has an index of refraction of 1.52. Optical-quality acrylic was introduced for eyeglass use in the early 1940s, but because it was easily scratched, brittle, and discolored rapidly, it did not sup- plant glass as the material of choice. Furthermore, it had a relatively low index of refraction, so it wasn’t suitable for people with large refractive errors. A plastic called CR-39, introduced in the 1960s, was more suitable. Today, eyeglass wearers can also choose between poly- carbonate, which is the most impact-resistant material available for eyewear, and polyurethane, which has exceptional optical qualities and an index of refraction of up to 1.66, much higher than the conventional plastics used for lenses, and even higher than glass. Patients with high prescriptions should ask about high index material options for their lenses. Aspheric lenses are