None

As many as 50% of women with ectopic pregnancies
have a history of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).
This is an infection of the fallopian tubes (salpingitis)
that can spread to the uterus or ovaries. It is most com-
monly caused by the organisms Gonorrhea and Chlamy-
dia and is usually transmitted by sexual intercourse.
Other conditions also increase the risk of ectopic
pregnancy. They include:
• Endometriosis. A condition in which the tissue that
normally lines the uterus is found outside the uterus,
and can block a fallopian tube.
• Exposure to diethylsilbestrol (DES) as a fetus. If a
woman’s mother took DES (a synthetic version of the
hormone estrogen) during pregnancy, the woman may
have abnormalities in her fallopian tubes that can make
ectopic pregnancy more likely.
• Taking hormones. Estrogen and progesterone are hor-
mones that regulate the menstrual cycle and may be in
medications prescribed by a doctor for birth control or
other reasons. Taking these hormones can affect the inte-
rior lining of the fallopian tubes and slow the movement
of the fertilized egg down the tube. Women who become
pregnant in spite of taking some progesterone-only con-
traceptives have a greater chance of an ectopic pregnan-
cy. Ectopic pregnancy is also more likely when the
ovaries are artificially stimulated with hormones to pro-
duce eggs for in vitro fertilization (a procedure in which
eggs are taken from a woman’s body, fertilized, and then
placed in the uterus in an attempt to conceive a child).
• Use of an intrauterine device (IUD). These contracep-
tive devices are designed to prevent fertilized eggs from
becoming implanted in the uterus, but they have only a
minimal effect on preventing ectopic pregnancies.
Therefore, if a woman becomes pregnant while using
an IUD for contraception, the fertilized egg is more
likely to be implanted someplace other than the uterus.
For example, among women who become pregnant
while using a progesterone-bearing IUD, about 15%
have ectopic pregnancies.
• Surgery on a fallopian tube. The risk of ectopic preg-
nancy can be as high as 60% after undergoing elective
tubal sterilization, a procedure in which the fallopian
tubes are severed to prevent pregnancy. Women who
have successful surgery to reverse the procedure are
also more likely to have an ectopic pregnancy.