None

• Hemophilia A in mild episodes may require infusion of
a drug called desmopressin or DDAVP. Severe bleeding
episodes will require transfusions of human blood clot-
ting factors. Hemophiliacs are encouraged to receive
physical therapy to help damaged joints and to exercise
in non-contact sports such as swimming, bicycle riding,
or walking.
• Christmas disease patients are treated similarly to
hemophilia A patients. There are commercial products
and human blood products available to provide coagu-
lation. Cryoprecipitate was invented in 1965 to replace
the need for whole plasma transfusions, which intro-
duced more volume than needed. By the 1970s, people
were able to infuse themselves with freeze-dried clot-
ting factor. Superficial wounds can be cleaned and ban-
daged. Parents of hemophiliac children receiving
immunizations should inform the vaccination provider
in advance to decrease the possibility of bleeding prob-
lems. These children should probably not receive injec-
tions which go into the muscle.
• Treatment for disseminated intravascular coagulation
patients is complicated by the large variety of underly-
ing causes of the disorder. If at all possible, the physi-
cian will first treat this underlying disorder. If the
patient is not already bleeding, this supportive treat-
ment may eliminate the DIC. However, if bleeding is
occurring, the patient may need blood, platelets, fresh
frozen plasma, or other blood products. Heparin has
been controversial in treating DIC, but it is often used
as a last resort to stop hemorrhage. Heparin has not
proven useful in treating patients with DIC resulting
from heat stroke, exotic snakebites, trauma, mis-
matched transfusions, and acute problems resulting
from obstetrical complications.
• Secondary acquired thrombocytopenia is best alleviated
by treating the underlying cause or disorder. The specif-
ic treatment may depend on the underlying cause.
Sometimes, cortocoosterids or immune globulin may
be given to improve platelet production.
• Von Willebrand’s disease is treated by several methods
to reduce bleeding time and to replace factor VIII,
which consequently will replace the Von Willebrand
factor. This may include infusion of cryoprecipitate or
fresh frozen plasma. Desmopressin may also help raise
levels of the Von Willebrand factor.
• Hypoprothrombinemia may be treated with concen-
trates of prothrombin. Vitamin K may also be produced,
and in bleeding episodes, the patient may receive fresh
plasma products.
• Factor XI (hemophilia C) is most often treated with
plasma, since there are no commercially available con-
centrates of factor XI in the United States. Factor VII
patients may be treated with prothrombin complex con-
centrates. As of early 1998, factor VII concentrate was
not licensed in the United States and could only be used
with special permission.