None

These portions of the colon are recognized anatomi-
cally based on the arterial blood supply and venous and
lymphatic drainage of these segments of the colon.
Lymph, a protein-rich fluid that bathes the cells of the
body, is transported in small channels known as lymphat-
ics that run along side the veins of the colon. Lymph
nodes are small filters through which the lymph travels
on its way back to the blood stream. Cancer can spread
elsewhere in the body by invading the lymph and vascu-
lar systems. Therefore, these anatomic considerations
become very important in the treatment of colon cancer.
The small intestine is the continuation of the upper
gastrointestinal tract that is responsible for the transport
of ingested nutrients into the body. The waste left after
the small intestine has completed absorption of nutrients
amounts to a few liters (about the same as quart) of mate-
rial per day and is directly delivered to the colon (at the
cecum) for processing. Physiologically, the colon is
responsible for the preservation of fluid and electrolytes
as it propels the increasingly solid waste towards the rec-
tum and anus for excretion.
When cells lining the colon become malignant, they
first grow locally and may invade partially or totally
through the wall of the bowel and even into adjacent
structures and organs. In the process, the tumor can pene-
trate and invade the lymphatics or the capillaries locally
and it gains access to the circulation. As the malignant
cells work their way to other areas of the body, they
again become locally invasive in the new area to which
they have spread. These tumor deposits, originating in
the colon primary tumor, are then known as metastases.
If metastases are found in the regional lymph nodes from
the primary, they are known as regional metastases or
regional nodal metastases. If they are distant from the
primary tumor, they are known as distant metastases. The
patient with distant metastases has systemic disease.
Thus the cancer originating in the colon begins locally
and, given time, can become systemic in its extent.
By the time the primary is originally detected, it is
usually larger than 0.4 in (1 cm) in size and has over a
million cells. This amount of growth itself is estimated to
take about three to seven years. Each time the cells dou-
ble in number, the size of the tumor quadruples. Thus,
like most cancers, the part that is identified clinically is
later in the progression than would be desired and
screening becomes a very important endeavor to aid in
earlier detection of this disease.
There are about 94,000 cases of colon cancer diag-
nosed per year in the United States. Together, colon and
rectal cancers account for 10% of cancers in men and
11% of cancers in women. It is the second most com-
mon site-specific cancer affecting both men and
women. (Lung cancer is the first affecting both men and
women, breast is the leader in women and prostate the
leader in men.) Nearly 48,000 people died from colon
cancer in the United States in 2000. In recent years the
incidence of this disease is decreasing very slightly, as
has the mortality rate. It is difficult to tell if the
decrease in mortality reflects earlier diagnosis, less
death related to the actual treatment of the disease, or a
combination of both factors.
Cancer of the colon is thought to arise sporadically
in about 80% of those who develop the disease. Twenty
percent of cases are thought to have genetic predisposi-
tion that ranges from familial syndromes affecting 50%
of the offspring of a mutation carrier, to a risk of 6%
when there is just a family history of colon cancer occur-
ring in a first degree relative. Development of colon can-
cer at an early age, or at multiple sites, or recurrent colon
cancer suggests a genetically transmitted form of the dis-
ease as opposed to the sporadic form.