A cold sore is a fluid-filled, painful blister that is
usually on or around the lips. Other names for a cold sore
are fever blister, oral herpes, labial herpes, herpes labi-
alis, and herpes febrilis. Cold sores most often occur on
the lips which distinguishes them from the common
canker sore, which is usually inside the mouth. Cold
sores do not usually occur inside the mouth except dur-
ing the initial episode. Canker sores usually form either
on the tongue or inside the cheeks.
Cold sores are caused by a herpes virus. There are
eight different kinds of human herpes viruses. Only two
of these, herpes simplex types 1 and 2, can cause cold
sores. It is commonly believed that herpes simplex virus
type 1 infects above the waist and herpes simplex virus
type 2 infects below the waist. This is not completely
true. Both herpes virus type 1 and type 2 can cause her-
pes lesions on the lips or genitals, but recurrent cold
sores are almost always type 1.
Oral herpes is very common. More than 60% of
Americans have had a cold sore, and almost 25% of
those infected experience recurrent outbreaks. Most of
these persons became infected before age 10. Anyone
can become infected by herpes virus and, once infected,
the virus remains latent for life. Herpes viruses are
spread from person to person by direct skin-to-skin con-
tact. The highest risk for spreading the virus is the time
period beginning with the appearance of blisters and end-
ing with scab formation. However, infected persons need
not have visible blisters to spread the infection to others
since the virus may be present in the saliva without obvi-
ous oral lesions.
Viruses are different from bacteria. While bacteria
are independent and can reproduce on their own, viruses
enter human cells and force them to make more virus. The
infected human cell is usually killed and releases thou-
sands of new viruses. The cell death and resulting tissue
damage causes the actual cold sores. In addition, the her-
pes virus can infect a cell and instead of making the cell
produce new viruses, it hides inside the cell and waits.
The herpes virus hides in the nervous system. This is
called “latency.” A latent virus can wait inside the nervous
system for days, months, or even years. At some future
time, the virus “awakens” and causes the cell to produce
thousands of new viruses that cause an active infection.
This process of latency and active infection is best
understood by considering the cold sore cycle. An active
infection is obvious because cold sores are present. The
first infection is called the “primary” infection. This active
infection is then controlled by the body’s immune system
and the sores heal. In between active infections, the virus
is latent. At some point in the future, latent viruses become
activated and once again cause sores. These are called
“recurrent” infections. Although it is unknown what trig-
gers latent virus to activate, several conditions seem to
bring on infections. These include stress, illness, tired-
ness, exposure to sunlight, menstruation, fever, and diet.

None