None

Detoxification specialists use a variety of tests to
determine the causes contributing to toxic conditions.
These causes include infections, allergies, addictions,
toxic chemicals, and digestive and organ dysfunction.
Blood, urine, stool, and hair analyses, as well as allergy
tests, are used to measure a variety of bodily functions
that may indicate problems. Detoxification therapists
usually have access to laboratories that specialize in
sophisticated diagnostic tests for toxic conditions.
People who have toxemia are often susceptible to
infection because their immune systems are weakened.
Infections can be caused by parasites, bacteria, viruses,
and a common yeast. Therapists will screen patients for
underlying infections that may be contributing to illness.
Liver function is studied closely with blood and
urine tests because the liver is the principle organ in the
body responsible for removing toxic compounds. When
the liver detoxifies a substance from the body, it does so
in two phases. Tests are performed that indicate where
problems may be occurring in these phases, which may
point to specific types of toxins. Blood and urine tests
can also be completed that screen for toxic chemicals
such as PCBs (environmental poisons), formaldehyde (a
common preservative), pesticides, and heavy metals.
Another useful blood test is a test for zinc deficiency,
which may reveal heavy metal poisoning. Hair analysis
is used to test for heavy metal levels in the body. Blood
and urine tests check immune system activity, and hor-
mone levels can also indicate specific toxic compounds.
A 24-hour urine analysis, where samples are taken
around the clock, allows therapists to determine the effi-
ciency of the digestive tract and kidneys. Together with
stool analysis, these tests may indicate toxic bowel syn-
drome and digestive system disorders. Certain blood and
urine tests may point to nutritional deficiencies and prop-
er recovery diets can be designed for patients as well.
Detoxification therapists may also perform extensive
allergy and hypersensitivity tests. Intradermal (between
layers of the skin) and sublingual (under the tongue)
allergy tests are used to determine a patient’s sensitivity
to a variety of common substances, including formalde-
hyde, auto exhaust, perfume, tobacco, chlorine, jet fuel,
and other chemicals.
Food allergies require additional tests because these
allergies often cause reactions that are delayed for several
days after the food is eaten. The RAST (radioallergosor-
bent test) is a blood test that determines the level of anti-
bodies (immunoglobulins) in the blood after specific
foods are eaten. The cytotoxic test is a blood test that
determines if certain substances affect blood cells, includ-
ing foods and chemicals. The ELISA-ACT (enzyme-
linked immunoserological assay activated cell test) is
considered to be one of the most accurate tests for aller-
gies and hypersensitivity to foods, chemicals, and other
agents. Other tests for food allergies are the elimination
and rotation diets, in which foods are systematically eval-
uated to determine the ones that are causing problems.
Detoxification therapists usually interview and
counsel patients closely to determine and correct
lifestyle, occupational, psychological, and emotional fac-
tors that may also be contributing to illness.