The practice of altering diet for special reasons
has existed since antiquity. For example, Judaism has
included numerous dietary restrictions for thousands
of years. One ancient Jewish sect, the Essenes, is said
to have developed a primitive detoxification diet
aimed at preparing the bodies, minds, and spirits of its
members for the coming of a “messiah” who would
deliver them from their Roman captors. Preventative
and therapeutic diets became quite popular during the
late twentieth century. Books promoting the latest
dietary plan continue to make the bestseller lists,
although not all of the information given is considered
authoritative.
The idea of a healthful diet is to provide all of the
calories and nutrients needed by the body for optimal
performance, at the same time ensuring that neither
nutritional deficiencies nor excesses occur. Diet plans
that claim to accomplish those objectives are so numer-
ous they are virtually uncountable. These diets employ a
variety of approaches, including the following:
• Fixed-menu: Offers little choice to the dieter. Specifies
exactly which foods will be consumed. Easy to follow,
but may be considered “boring” to some dieters.
• Formula: Replaces some or all meals with a nutritional-
ly balanced liquid formula or powder.
• Exchange-type: Allows the dieter to choose between
selected foods from each food group.
• Flexible: Doesn’t concern itself with the overall diet,
simply with one aspect such as fat or energy.
Diets may also be classified according to the types
of foods they allow. For example, an omnivorous diet
consists of both animal and plant foods, whereas a lacto-
ovo-vegetarian diet permits no animal flesh, but does
include eggs, milk, and dairy products. A vegan diet is a
stricter form of vegetarianism in which eggs, cheese,
and other milk products are prohibited.
A third way of classifying diets is according to their
purpose: religious, weight-loss, detoxification, lifestyle-
related, or aimed at prevention or treatment of a specific
disease.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1069

None