None

coagulant, or blood thinner, which makes hemorrhage
more likely.
• Flemish type of hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with
amyloidosis: autosomal dominant, with a mutation
involving the amyloid precursor protein. Symptoms
include brain hemorrhage or dementia.
• Familial Alzheimer’s disease: autosomal dominant,
comprising 5–10% of all Alzheimer’s disease cases (a
brain disease in which death of nerve cells leads to pro-
gressive dementia).
• Down Syndrome: caused by trisomy 21 (three rather
than two copies of chromosome 21), causing excess
amyloid precursor protein gene. Children with Down
syndrome are mentally handicapped and may have
heart problems.
• Icelandic type of hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with
amyloidosis: autosomal dominant, with mutation in the
gene coding for cystatin C. Symptoms often begin at
age 30–40 with multiple brain hemorrhages, dementia,
paralysis (weakness), and death in 10–20 years.
Headache occurs in more than half of patients, and
seizures occur in one-quarter. Unlike most other forms
of CAA, most hemorrhages involve the basal ganglia
deep within the brain (Basal ganglia are islands of tis-
sues in the cerebellum part of the brain.).
• Familial oculo-leptomeningeal amyloidosis: autosomal
dominant with unknown gene defect(s), described in
Japanese, Italian, and North American families. Symp-
toms can include dementia, ataxia (problems with coor-
dination), spasticity (limb stiffness), strokes, seizures,
peripheral neuropathy (disease affecting the nerves
supplying the limbs), migraine, spinal cord problems,
blindness, and deafness. Brain hemorrhage is rare as
the amyloid protein is deposited in blood vessels in the
eye and meninges (brain coverings), but not in the brain
itself. In Italian families with the disease, patients may
be affected as early as 20–30 years of age.
• British type of familial amyloidosis: autosomal domi-
nant with unknown gene defect(s), associated with pro-
gressive dementia, spasticity, and ataxia. Brain stem,
spinal cord, and cerebellum all exhibit amyloid deposits,
but hemorrhage typically does not occur.