This method of re-educating the nervous system
can be beneficial to a wide range of people, including
athletes, children, the elderly, martial artists, those who
are handicapped, people with special needs, and those
suffering from degenerative diseases. It has also
proved popular with artists, particularly musicians, a
number of whom have used Feldenkrais to improve
their performance.
The Feldenkrais Guild of North America (FGNA)
states that over half of the those who turn to Feldenkrais
practitioners are seeking relief from pain. Many people
who have pain from an injury compensate by changing
their movements to limit pain. Often these changed
movements remain after the pain from the original
injury is gone, and new pain may occur. Feldenkrais
helps students become aware of the changed movements
and allows them to learn new movements that relieve
their pain. Apart from the obvious physical benefits of
more efficient movement and freedom from pain and
restriction, Feldenkrais practitioners assert that there are
other positive benefits for overall physical and mental
health. Feldenkrais can result in increased awareness,
flexibility, and coordination, and better relaxation.
Feldenkrais practitioners have also noted other benefits
in their students, including improvements in awareness,
flexibility, coordination, breathing, digestion, sleep,
mood, mental alertness, energy, and range of motion, as
well as reduced stress and hypertension, and fewer
headaches and backaches.
Musicians and athletes can improve their perfor-
mance in many ways when they learn to use their bodies
more efficiently. Feldenkrais can also help injured ath-
letes regain lost potential and free them from pain and
restriction of movement.
There are numerous accounts of the remarkable
results obtained when Feldenkrais is taught to handi-
capped children so that they can learn to function despite
their limitations. Handicapped people can learn to make
full use of whatever potential they have, and to have
more confidence in their abilities. Practitioners who spe-
cialize in teaching Feldenkrais to those who have handi-
caps have in many cases allowed the patient to discover
ways of performing tasks which were previously thought
to be impossible for them.
The elderly, whose movements are often restricted
by pain and stiffness, can learn to overcome these obsta-
cles with Feldenkrais instruction. In some instances even
severe cases of arthritis have been conquered. Theoreti-
cally, Feldenkrais can make possible renewed levels of
energy and freedom from restriction.

None