unusually foul-smelling stools. The patient may com-
plain of excessive gas (flatulence), distended abdomen,
weight loss, and generalized weakness. Not all people
have digestive system complications; some people only
have irritability or depression. Irritability is one of the
most common symptoms in children with celiac disease.
Not all patients have these problems. Unrecognized
and therefore untreated celiac disease may cause or con-
tribute to a variety of other conditions. The decreased
ability to digest, absorb, and utilize food properly (mal-
absorption) may cause anemia (low red blood count)
from iron deficiency or easy bruising from a lack of vita-
min K. Poor mineral absorption may result in osteoporo-
sis, or “brittle bones,” which may lead to bone fractures.
Vitamin D levels may be insufficient and bring about a
“softening” of bones (osteomalacia), which produces
pain and bony deformities, such as flattening or bending.
Defects in the tooth enamel, characteristic of celiac dis-
ease, may be recognized by dentists. Celiac disease may
be discovered during medical tests performed to investi-
gate failure to thrive in infants, or lack of proper growth
in children and adolescents. People with celiac disease
may also experience lactose intolerance because they
don’t produce enough of the enzyme lactase, which
breaks down the sugar in milk into a form the body can
absorb. Other symptoms can include muscle cramps,
fatigue, delayed growth, tingling or numbness in the legs
(from nerve damage), pale sores in the mouth (called
aphthus ulcers), tooth discoloration, or missed menstrual
periods (due to severe weight loss).
A distinctive, painful skin rash, called dermatitis
herpetiformis, may be the first sign of celiac disease.
Approximately 10% of patients with celiac disease have
this rash, but it is estimated that 85% or more of patients
with the rash have the disease.
Many disorders are associated with celiac disease,
though the nature of the connection is unclear. One type
of epilepsy is linked to celiac disease. Once their celiac
disease is successfully treated, a significant number of
these patients have fewer or no seizures. Patients with
alopecia areata, a condition where hair loss occurs in
sharply defined areas, have been shown to have a higher
risk of celiac disease than the general population. There
appears to be a higher percentage of celiac disease
among people with Down syndrome, but the link
between the conditions is unknown.
Several conditions attributed to a disorder of the
immune system have been associated with celiac disease.
People with insulin dependent diabetes (type I) have a
much higher incidence of celiac disease. One source esti-
mates that as many as one in 20 insulin-dependent dia-
betics may have celiac disease. Patients with other condi-
tions where celiac disease may be more commonly found
include those with juvenile chronic arthritis, some thy-
roid diseases, and IgA deficiency.
There is an increased risk of intestinal lymphoma, a
type of cancer, in individuals with celiac disease. Suc-
cessful treatment of the celiac disease seems to decrease
the chance of developing lymphoma.

None