None

Antibiotic—A medication that is designed to kill or
weaken bacteria.
Bilirubin—A pigment produced by the liver that is
excreted in bile which causes a yellow discol-
oration of the skin and eyes when it accumulates in
those organs. Bilirubin levels can be measured by
blood tests, and are most often elevated in patients
with liver disease or a blockage to bile flow.
Computed tomography scan (CT scan)—A special-
ized x-ray procedure in which cross-sections of the
area in question can be examined in detail. In eval-
uating the bile ducts, iodine-based dye is often
injected intravenously. The procedure is of greatest
value in diagnosing the complications of gallstones
(such as abscesses, pancreatitis) rather than docu-
menting the presence of a stone.
Endoscope—An endoscope as used in the field of
gastroenterology is a thin flexible tube which uses a
lens or miniature camera to view various areas of
the gastrointestinal tract. When the procedure is
performed to examine certain organs such as the
bile ducts or pancreas, the organs are not viewed
directly, but rather indirectly through the injection
of x-ray dye into the bile duct.
Endoscopy—The performance of an exam using an
endoscope is referred by the general term
endoscopy. Diagnosis through biopsies or other
means and therapeutic procedures can be done
with these instruments.
Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy (ESWL)—This
is a technique that uses high-pressure waves similar
to sound waves that can be “focused” on a very small
area, thereby fracturing small solid objects such as
gallstones, kidney stones, etc. The small fragments
can pass more easily and harmlessly into the intes-
tine or can be dissolved with medications.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis—A chronic disease
in which it is believed that the immune system fails
to recognize the cells that compose the bile ducts as
part of the same body, and attempts to destroy
them. It is not clear what exactly causes the disease,
but it is frequently associated with another inflam-
matory disease of the digestive tract, ulcerative coli-
tis. The inflammation of the ducts eventually pro-
duces formation of scar tissue, causing multiple
areas of narrowing (strictures) that block bile flow
and lead to bacterial infection. Liver transplant
gives the best chance for long-term survival.
Ultrasound—A non-invasive procedure based on
changes in sound waves of a frequency that cannot
be heard, but respond to changes in tissue composi-
tion. It requires no preparation and no radiation
occurs. It has become the “gold standard” for diag-
nosis of stones in the gallbladder, but is less accurate
in diagnosing stones in the bile ducts. Gallstones as
small as 2 mm can be identified. The procedure can
now also be done through an endoscope, greatly
improving investigation of the bile ducts.
infection does not come under control promptly, as noted
by decrease in fever and pain, then other methods to
relieve the obstruction and infection will be needed.
Either way, definitive treatment of the cause of bile duct
infection is the next step, and this has undergone revolu-
tionary changes in the past decade. Endoscopic, radi-
ographic and other techniques have made it possible to
successfully remove stones and dilate strictures that pre-
viously required surgical intervention, often with high
morbidity and mortality.