None

Arthrochalasia—Excessive loosness of the joints.
Blood vessels—General term for arteries, veins, and
capillaries that transport blood throughout the body.
Cartilage—Supportive connective tissue that cush-
ions bone at the joints or which connects muscle to
bone.
Collagen—The main supportive protein of cartilage,
connective tissue, tendon, skin, and bone.
Connective tissue—A group of tissues responsible
for support throughout the body; includes cartilage,
bone, fat, tissue underlying skin, and tissues that
support organs, blood vessels, and nerves through-
out the body.
Dermatosparaxis—Skin fragility caused by abnor-
mal collagen.
Hernia—A rupture in the wall of a body cavity,
through which an organ may protrude.
Homeopathic—A holistic and natural approach to
healthcare.
Hyperextensibility—The ability to extend a joint
beyond the normal range.
Hypermobility—Unusual flexibility of the joints,
allowing them to be bent or moved beyond their
normal range of motion.
Joint dislocation—The displacement of a bone.
Kyphoscoliosis—Abnormal front-to-back and side-
to-side curvature of the spine.
Ligament—A type of connective tissue that con-
nects bones or cartilage and provides support and
strength to joints.
Osteoarthritis—A degenerative joint disease that
causes pain and stiffness.
Scoliosis—An abnormal, side-to-side curvature of
the spine.
Tendon—A strong connective tissue that connects
muscle to bone.
Uterus—A muscular, hollow organ of the female
reproductive tract. The uterus contains and nourish-
es the embryo and fetus from the time the fertilized
egg is implanted until birth.
Vascular—Having to do with blood vessels.
ty of passing on the disorder to a future child. In X-
linked EDS a specific gene on the X chromosome must
be changed. However, this affects males and females dif-
ferently because males and females have a different num-
ber of X chromosomes.
As of 2001 the few X-linked forms of EDS fall under
the category of X-linked recessive. As with autosomal
recessive, this implies that both copies of a specific gene
must be changed for a person to be affected. However,
because males only have one X-chromosome, they are
affected if an X-linked recessive EDS gene is changed on
their single X-chromosome. That is, they are affected
even though they have only one changed copy. On the
other hand, that same gene must be changed on both of
the X-chromosomes in a female for her to be affected.
Although there is much information regarding the
changes in genes that cause EDS and their various inheri-
tance patterns, the exact gene mutation for all types of
EDS is not known.