None

Every month, a woman’s body begins the process
that can potentially lead to pregnancy. An egg (ovum)
matures, the mucus that is secreted by the cervix (a cylin-
drical-shaped organ at the lower end of the uterus)
changes to be more inviting to sperm, and the lining of
the uterus grows in preparation for receiving a fertilized
egg. Any woman who wants to prevent pregnancy must
use a reliable form of birth control.
Birth control (contraception) is designed to interfere
with the normal process and prevent the pregnancy that
could result. There are different kinds of birth control
that act at different points in the process, from ovulation,
through fertilization, to implantation. Each method has
its own side effects and risks. Some methods are more
reliable than others.
Although there are many different types of birth
control, they can be divided into a few groups based on
how they work. These groups include:
• Hormonal methods—These use medications (hor-
mones) to prevent ovulation. Hormonal methods
include birth control pills (oral contraceptives), Depo
Provera injections and Norplant.
• Barrier methods—These methods work by preventing
the sperm from getting to and fertilizing the egg. Barri-
er methods include the condom, diaphragm, and cervi-
cal cap. The condom is the only form of birth control
that also protects against sexually transmitted dis-
eases, including HIV (the virus that causes AIDS).
• Spermicides—These medications kill sperm on con-
tact. Most spermicides contain nonoxynyl-9. Spermi-
cides come in many different forms such as jelly, foam,
tablets, and even a transparent film. All are placed in
the vagina. Spermicides work best when they are used
at the same time as a barrier method.
• Intrauterine 
devices—Intrauterine 
contraceptive
devices (IUDs) are inserted into the uterus, where they
stay from one to 10 years. An IUD prevents the fertil-
ized egg from implanting in the lining of the uterus, and
may have other effects as well.
• Tubal sterilization—Tubal sterilization is a permanent
form of contraception for women. Each fallopian tube
is either tied or burned closed. The sperm cannot reach
the egg, and the egg cannot travel to the uterus.
• Vasectomy—is the male form of sterilization, and
should also be considered permanent. In vasectomy,
the vas defrens, the tiny tubes that carry the sperm into
the semen, are cut and tied off. Thus, no sperm can get
into the semen.
Unfortunately, there is no perfect form of birth con-
trol. Only abstinence (not having sexual intercourse) can
protect against unwanted pregnancy with 100% reliability.
The failure rates, which means the rates of pregnancy, for
most forms of birth control are quite low. However, some
forms of birth control are more difficult or inconvenient to
use than others. In actual practice, the birth control meth-
ods that are more difficult or inconvenient have much
higher failure rates because they are not used faithfully.