The various complications of diverticulitis need to
be treated aggressively, because the death rate from such
things as perforation and peritonitis is quite high.
Abscesses can be drained of their infected contents by
inserting a needle through the skin of the abdomen and
into the abscess. When this is unsuccessful, open abdom-
inal surgery will be required to remove the piece of the
intestine containing the abscess. Fistulas require surgical
repair, including the removal of the length of intestine
containing the origin of the fistula, followed by immedi-
ate reconnection of the two free ends of intestine. Peri-
tonitis requires open surgery. The entire abdominal cavi-
ty is cleaned by being irrigated (washed) with a warmed
sterile saltwater solution, and the damaged piece of
intestine is removed. Obstructions require immediate
surgery to prevent perforation. Massive, uncontrollable
bleeding, while rare, may require removal of part or all
of the large intestine.
During any of these types of operations, the surgeon
must make an important decision regarding the quantity
of intestine which must be removed. When the amount of
intestine removed is great, it may be necessary to per-
form a colostomy. A colostomy involves pulling the end
of the remaining intestine through the abdominal wall, to
the outside. This bit of intestine is then fashioned so that
a bag can be fit over it. The patient’s waste (feces) collect
in the bag, because the intestine no longer connects with
the rectum. This colostomy may be temporary, in which
case another operation will be required to reconnect the
intestine, after some months of substantial healing has
occurred. Other times, the colostomy will need to be per-
manent, and the patient will have to adjust to living per-
manently with the colostomy bag. Most people with
colostomies are able to go on with a very active life.
Occasionally, a patient will have such severe diver-
ticular disease that a surgeon recommends planning
ahead, and schedules removal of a portion of the colon.
This is done to avoid the high risk of surgery performed
after a complication has set in. Certain developments in a
patient will identify those patients who are at very high
risk of experiencing dangerous complications. Such elec-
tive surgery may be recommended:
• when an older individual has had several attacks of
diverticulitis
• when someone under the age of 50 has had even one
attack
• when treatment does not get rid of a painful mass
• when the intestine appears to be narrowing on x-ray
examination (this could suggest the presence of cancer)
• when certain patients begin to regularly experience
painful urination or urinary infections (this suggests

None