None

Coccyx—The last bone of the spinal column, con-
sisting of three to five fused vertebrae that connect
with the sacrum, a part of the pelvis.
Coccydynia—Also called coccygodynia. Pain in or
around the coccyx.
Foramen—A small opening, perforation, or orifice.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—An imaging
technique that produces pictures of the inside of
the body.
Sacrum—The triangle-shaped bone located
between the fifth lumbar vertebra and the coccyx
that consists of five vertebrae fused together. The
sacrum joins on each side with the bones of the
pelvis.
Spinal cord—Elongated nerve bundles that lie in
the vertebral canal and from which the spinal
nerves emerge.
Vertebrae—Bones in the cervical, thoracic, and
lumbar regions of the body that make up the verte-
bral column. Vertebrae have a central foramen
(hole), and their superposition makes up the verte-
bral canal that encloses the spinal cord.
Vertebral column—The vertebral column, also
called the spinal column or spine, consists of a
series of vertebrae connected by ligaments. It pro-
vides a supporting axis for the body and protects
the spinal cord. The vertebral column consists of
seven cervical vertebrae in the neck, followed by
12 thoracic vertebrae that connect to the ribs, five
lumbar vertebrae in the lower back, the sacrum,
and the coccyx.
underlying condition exists of which the pain is a warn-
ing sign. Nerve blocks and a variety of drugs are other
options to control pain.
Elimination of the root cause of the pain is ideal.
This is done through careful diagnosis and the applica-
tion of manual treatments, corticosteroid injections into
the coccyx vertebrae, or surgery. Injections into the
fourth and fifth sacral nerves and coccygeal nerves often
bring relief, but are considered more as a pain control
measure than as curative treatment. Manual treatments
have not been found to be effective. Surgery is a radical
procedure whose indications are inconsistent and depen-
dent on the subjectivity of the physician.