tory of hepatitis or heavy drinking, recent use of certain
drugs, and symptoms like ascites (abnormal abdominal
swelling) and splenomegaly (enlarged spleen) suggest
intrahepatic cholestasis. Pain or rigidity in the gallblad-
der or pancreas suggest an extrahepatic form.
Blood tests and liver function tests can reveal the
pattern and extent of liver injury, indicate functional
abnormalities, and establish the cause of the condition.
However, most misdiagnoses occur when physicians rely
more on laboratory analysis than on detailed medical his-
tory and the results of a thorough physical examination.
Special attention should be paid to three liver function
tests. Levels of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), and aspartate aminotransferase
(AST) can indicate whether the patient’s condition is
caused by an obstructive condition like cholestasis or a
disease of the liver cells (hepatocellular disease) like
viral hepatitis or cancer. ALP levels more than three
times greater than normal indicate cholestasis. High lev-
els of AST and particularly of ALT, which is found pre-
dominantly in liver cells, indicate hepatocellular disease.
Once the disease pattern has been established, ultra-
sound may be performed to determine whether obstruc-
tion of the large duct has caused widening of small ducts
located close to it. Computed tomography scans (CT)
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can provide
more detailed information about the source of the
obstruction. If these procedures that do not enter the
patient’s body (non-invasive procedures) do not provide
the information a family physician, internist, or gastroen-
terologist needs to make a diagnosis of cholestasis, one
of these procedures may be performed:
• direct cholangiography, an x-ray map of the bile ducts,
enhanced by the use of contrast dye
• percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography, used to
identify obstructions that impede the flow of bile from
the liver to the digestive system, takes x-ray images of
the bile ducts after a contrast dye has been injected by a
needle passed directly into a hepatic duct
• endoscopic 
retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP), which uses a special dye to outline the pancre-
atic and common bile ducts and highlight the position
of any obstruction; a special tube with a light transmit-
ter is inserted into the duct and a series of x-ray images
is taken
A doctor who thinks a physical obstruction is
responsible for progressive deterioration of a patient’s
condition may consider an exploratory surgical proce-
dure (diagnostic laparotomy). Liver biopsy is sometimes
performed if imaging tests do not indicate why a duct is
enlarged, but results of a single biopsy may not represent
the status of the entire organ.

None