Folic acid works together with vitamin B12 and vita-
min C to metabolize protein in the body. It is important
for the formation of red and white blood cells. It is neces-
sary for the proper differentiation and growth of cells and
for the development of the fetus. It is also used to form
the nucleic acid of DNA and RNA. It increases the
appetite and stimulates the production of stomach acid
for digestion and it aids in maintaining a healthy liver. A
deficiency of folic acid may lead to anemia, in which
there is decreased production of red blood cells. This
reduces the amounts of oxygen and nutrients that are able
to get to the tissues. Symptoms may include fatigue,
reduced secretion of digestive acids, confusion, and for-
getfulness. During pregnancy, a folic acid deficiency
may lead to preeclampsia, premature birth, and increased
bleeding after birth.
People who are at high risk of strokes and heart dis-
ease may greatly benefit by taking folic acid supple-
ments. An elevated blood level of the amino acid homo-
cysteine has been identified as a risk factor for some of
these diseases. High levels of homocysteine have also
been found to contribute to problems with osteoporosis.
Folic acid, together with vitamins B6 and B12, helps break
down homocysteine, and may help reverse the problems
associated with elevated levels.
Pregnant women have an increased need for folic
acid, both for themselves and their child. Folic acid is
necessary for the proper growth and development of the
fetus. Adequate intake of folic acid is vital for the pre-
vention of several types of birth defects, particularly
NTDs. The neural tube of the embryo develops into the
brain, spinal cord, spinal column, and the skull. If this
tube forms incompletely during the first few months of
pregnancy a serious, and often fatal, defect results in
spina bifida or anencephaly. Folic acid, taken from one
year to one month before conception through the first
four months of pregnancy, can reduce the risk of NTDs
by 50–70%. It also helps prevent a cleft lip and palate.
Research shows that folic acid can be used to suc-
cessfully treat cervical dysplasia, a condition diagnosed
by a Pap smear, of having abnormal cells in the cervix.
This condition is considered to be a possible precursor to
cervical cancer, and is diagnosed as an abnormal Pap
smear. Daily consumption of 1,000 mcg of folic acid for
three or more months has resulted in improved cervical
cells upon repeat Pap smears.
Studies suggest that long-term use of folic acid sup-
plements may also help prevent lung and colon cancer.
Researchers have also found that alcoholics who have
low folic acid levels face a greatly increased possibility
of developing colon cancer.

None