familial, iatrogenic, and sporadic.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
950
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
• Familial CJD, representing 5–15% of cases, is inherited
in an autosomal dominant manner, meaning that either
parent may pass along the disease to a child, who may
then develop CJD later in life.
• Iatrogenic CJD occurs when a person is infected during
a medical procedure, such as organ donation, blood
transfusion, or brain surgery. The rise in organ dona-
tion has increased this route of transmission; grafts of
infected corneas and dura mater (the tissue covering the
brain) have been shown to transmit CJD. Another
source is hormones concentrated from the pituitary
glands of cadavers, some of whom carried CJD, for use
in people with growth hormone deficiencies. Iatrogenic
infection from exposure to nerve-containing tissue rep-
resents a small fraction of all cases. The incubation
period between exposure to the infectious agent is very
long and is estimated to be from less than 10 to more
than 30 years. It remains unlikely, but not impossible,
that blood from patients with CJD is infectious to oth-
ers by transfusion.
• Sporadic CJD represents at least 85% of all cases. Spo-
radic cases have no identifiable source of infection. Death
usually follows first symptoms within eight months.
Animal forms and “mad cow disease”
Six forms of spongiform encephalopathies are
known to occur in other mammals: scrapie in sheep, rec-
ognized for more than 200 years; chronic wasting disease
in elk and mule deer in Wyoming and Colorado; trans-
missible mink encephalopathy; exotic ungulate
encephalopathy in some types of zoo animals; feline
spongiform encephalopathy in domestic cats; and bovine
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cows.
BSE was first recognized in Britain in 1986. Besides
the spongiform changes in the brain, BSE causes demen-
tia-like behavioral changes—hence the name “mad cow
disease.” BSE was thought to be an altered form of
scrapie, transmitted to cows when they were fed sheep
offal (slaughterhouse waste) as part of their feed, but it is
now thought to be more likely to be a primary cattle dis-
ease spread by contaminated feed.
The use of slaughterhouse offal in animal feed has
been common in many countries and has been practiced
for at least 50 years. The trigger for the BSE epidemic in
Great Britain seems to have come in the early 1980s,
when the use of organic solvents for preparation of offal
was altered there. It is possible that these solvents had
been destroying the agent called a prion, thereby prevent-
ing infection, and that the change in preparation proce-
dure opened the way for the agent to “jump species” and
cause BSE in cows that consumed scrapie-infected meal.
The slaughter of infected (but not yet visibly sick) cows
at the end of their useful farm lives, and the use of their
carcasses for feed, spread the infection rapidly and wide-
ly. For at least a year after BSE was first recognized in
British herds, infected bovine remains continued to be
incorporated into feed, spreading the disease still further.
Although milk from infected cows has never been shown
to pass the infectious agent, passage from infected moth-
er to calf may have occurred through unknown means.
Beginning in 1988, the British government took
steps to stop the spread of BSE, banning the use of
bovine offal in feed and other products and ordering the
slaughter of infected cows. By then, the slow-acting
agent had become epidemic in British herds. In 1992, it
was diagnosed in over 25,000 animals (1% of the
British herd). By mid-1997, the cumulative number of
BSE cases in the United Kingdom had risen to more
than 170,000. The feeding ban did stem the tide of the
epidemic; however, the number of new cases each week
fell from a peak of 1,000 in 1993 to less than 300 two
years later.
The export of British feed and beef to member coun-
tries was banned by the European Union, but cases of
BSE had developed in Europe by then as well; however,
by mid-1997, only about 1,000 cases had been identified.
In 1989, the United States banned import of British beef
and began monitoring United States herds in 1990. To
date, no BSE has been detected in the United States, and
only one case has been reported in North America in a
cow imported to Canada from Great Britain.

None