In order to have a clear picture of these disorders,
dissociation should first be understood. Dissociation is a
mechanism that allows the mind to separate or compart-
mentalize certain memories or thoughts from normal
consciousness. These split-off mental contents are not
erased. They may resurface spontaneously or be trig-
gered by objects or events in the person’s environment.
Dissociation is a process that occurs along a spec-
trum of severity. It does not necessarily mean that a per-
son has a dissociative disorder or other mental illness. A
mild degree of dissociation occurs with some physical
stressors; people who have gone without sleep for a long
period of time, have had “laughing gas” for dental
surgery, or have been in a minor accident often have
brief dissociative experiences. Another commonplace
example of dissociation is a person becoming involved
in a book or movie so completely that the surroundings
or the passage of time are not noticed. Another example
might be driving on the highway and taking several exits
without noticing or remembering. Dissociation is related
to hypnosis in that hypnotic trance also involves a tem-
porarily altered state of consciousness. Most patients
with dissociative disorders are highly hypnotizable.
People in other cultures sometimes have dissociative
experiences in the course of religious (in certain trance
states) or other group activities. These occurrences
should not be judged in terms of what is considered “nor-
mal” in the United States.
Moderate or severe forms of dissociation are caused
by such traumatic experiences as childhood abuse, com-
bat, criminal attacks, brainwashing in hostage situations,
or involvement in a natural or transportation disaster.
Patients with acute stress disorder, post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), or conversion disorder and
somatization disorder may develop dissociative symp-
toms. Recent studies of trauma indicate that the human
brain stores traumatic memories in a different way than
normal memories. Traumatic memories are not
processed or integrated into a person’s ongoing life in
the same fashion as normal memories. Instead they are
dissociated, or “split off,” and may erupt into conscious-
ness from time to time without warning. The affected
person cannot control or “edit” these memories. Over a
period of time, these two sets of memories, the normal
and the traumatic, may coexist as parallel sets without
being combined or blended. In extreme cases, different
sets of dissociated memories may alter subpersonalities
of patients with dissociative identity disorder (multiple
personality disorder).
The dissociative disorders vary in their severity and
the suddenness of onset. It is difficult to give statistics
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1085

None