None

If cleft lip and/or palate are diagnosed by ultrasound
before birth, further testing may be required to diagnose
associated abnormalities if present. Referral to a cleft
team is essential. A cleft team consists of specialists in
the management of babies with clefts and includes sur-
geons as well as nurses and speech therapists. Members
of the team inform the parents of all aspects of manage-
ment. Feeding methods are also discussed, since feeding
is the first problem that must be dealt with. It may be
possible to breastfeed a baby born with only a cleft lip,
but babies born with cleft palates usually have more
problems with feeding and frequently require special
bottles and teats. A palatal obturator is a device that fits
into the roof of the mouth, thus blocking the cleft open-
ing and allowing easier suckling.
Surgery to repair cleft lips is sometimes performed
after orthodontic treatment to narrow the gap in the upper
lip. The orthodontic treatment can involve acrylic splints
with or without screws or may involve the use of adhesive
tape placed across the gap in the lip. The orthodontic treat-
ment for cleft lip should be started within the first three
weeks of life and continue until the cleft lip is repaired.
The timing of surgical cleft lip repair depends on the
judgment of the surgeon who will perform the operation.
The procedure is usually performed between one and
three months of age. The goals of the operation are to
close the gap in the upper lip, place scars in the natural
skin curves and to repair muscle so that the lip appears
normal during movement. The closure is done in the
three layers (skin, muscle, and mucosa) that line the
inside of the lip. At the time of the procedure, if the nose
is shaped abnormally due to the cleft lip, it is also cor-
rected. Sometimes further surgery may be needed on the
lip and/or nose to refine the result.
The goals of the surgeon repairing a cleft palate are
normal speech, normal facial growth, and hearing for the
affected infant. The repair of the cleft palate is usually per-
formed between three and 18 months of age. The timing
may extend beyond this and varies with the type of cleft
palate and center where the procedure is being performed.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
819