None

A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of lung tissue indi-
cating emphysema. (Photograph by Hossler, Ph.D., Custom
Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
inflammation of the airway walls. They are occasional-
ly used if bronchodilators are ineffective in preventing
airway obstruction. Some patients’ lung function
improves with corticosteroids, and inhaled steroids may
be beneficial to patients with few side effects. A variety
of antibiotics are frequently given at the first sign of a
respiratory infection, such as increased amounts of spu-
tum, or if there has been a change in the color of the
sputum. Expectorants can help to loosen respiratory
secretions, enabling the patient to more easily expel
them from the airways.
Many of the medications prescribed involve the use
of a metered dose inhaler (MDI) that may require special
instruction to be used correctly. MDIs are a convenient
and safe method of delivering medication to the lungs.
However, if they are used incorrectly the medication will
not get to the right place. Proper technique is essential
for the medication to be effective.
For some patients, surgical treatment may be the
best option. Lung volume reduction surgery is a surgical
procedure in which the most diseased parts of the lung
are removed to enable the remaining lung and breathing
muscles to work more efficiently. Preliminary studies
suggest improved survival rates and better functioning
with the surgery. Another surgical procedure used for
emphysema patients is lung transplantation. Trans-
plantation may involve one or both lungs. However, it is
a risky and expensive procedure, and donor organs may
not be available.
For those patients with advanced emphysema, keep-
ing the air passages reasonably clear of secretions can
prove difficult. Some common methods for mobilizing
and removing secretions include:
• Postural drainage. This helps to remove secretions from
the airways. The patient lies in a position that allows
gravity to aid in draining different parts of the lung.
This is often done after the patient inhales an aerosol
medication. The basic position involves the patient
lying on the bed with his chest and head over the side
and the forearms resting on the floor.
• Chest percussion. This technique involves lightly clap-
ping the back and chest, and may help to loosen thick
secretions.
• Coughing and deep breathing. These techniques may
aid the patient in bringing up secretions.
• Aerosol treatments. These treatments may involve solu-
tions of saline, often mixed with a bronchodilator,
which are then inhaled as an aerosol. The aerosols thin
and loosen secretions. A treatment normally takes 10 to
15 minutes, and is given three or four times a day.
Patients with COPD can learn to perform a variety
of self-help measures that may help improve their symp-
toms and their ability to participate in everyday activi-
ties. These measures include:
• Avoiding any exposure to dusts and fumes.
• Avoiding air pollution, including the cigarette smoke of
others.
• Avoiding other people who have infections like the cold
or flu. Get a pneumonia vaccination and a yearly flu
shot.
• Drinking plenty of fluids. This helps to loosen respira-
tory secretions so they can be brought up more easily
through coughing.
• Avoiding extreme temperatures of heat or cold. Also
avoiding high altitudes. (Special precautions can be
taken that may enable the emphysema patient to fly on
a plane.)
• Maintaining adequate nutritional intake. Normally a
high protein diet taken in many small feedings is rec-
ommended.