None

The primary purpose of definitive care is to establish
a cure and to destruct and remove all cancer cells from
the infected person.
Surgery is not only a diagnostic tool, but also used
for tumor removal. The surgeon usually identifies poten-
tial candidates for tumor removal and repairs intraopera-
tively (during the operation procedure). Surgery can be
curative for some stomach, genital/urinary, thyroid,
breast, skin, and central nervous system cancers. The best
chance for a surgical cure is usually with the first opera-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
638
Cancer therapy, definitive
tion. It is essential that the cancer surgeon (oncologic sur-
geon) be experienced in the specific procedure.
Radiation therapy is commonly administered to
approximately 50% of cancer patients during the course of
illness. It can be used as the sole method of cure for tumors
in the mouth and neighboring structures in the oral cavity,
vagina, prostate, cervix, esophagus, Hodgkin’s disease,
and certain types of cancer in the spinal cord and brain.
Research and clinical trials have demonstrated that combi-
nation treatment is more effective than radiotherapy alone.
Chemotherapy is curative for only a small percent-
age of cancers. It is most effective for choriocarcinoma,
cancer of the testis, some types of lymphomas, and can-
cer of skeletal muscles.
Biological therapies are a new and promising direc-
tion for cancer cures. Usually when cancer cells grow
they manage to derive a blood supply that allows passage
of nutrients promoting continuation of abnormal cancer
growth. Research that focuses on destroying these blood
vessels is called angiogenesis. Cutting off the blood sup-
ply has been shown to destroy tumors, since this stops
the flow of essential nutrients required for cancer growth.
Use of certain growth factors can also stimulate self-
destructive pathways in cancer cells (apoptosis). Gene
therapy is directed towards inhibiting specific cellular
signals that promote cancer cell multiplication.