Treatment of CTCL depends on the stage of the dis- ease. The current staging of this disease was first presented at the International Consensus Conference on CTCL in 1997. The staging attempts to show the complex interac- tion between the various outward symptoms of the disease and prognosis. The system has seven clinical stages based on skin involvement (tumor = T), lymph node involvement (LN), and presence of visceral metastases (M). The first stage, IA, is characterized by plaques cov- ering less than 10% of the body (T1) and no visceral involvement (M0). Lymph node condition at this stage can be uninvolved, reactive to the skin disease, or der- matopathic (biopsies showing CTCL involvement) but not enlarged (LN0-2). The shorthand expression of this stage is therefore T1, LN0-2, M0. The next stage, IB, dif- fers from IA in that greater than 10% of the body is cov- ered by plaques (T2, LN0-2, M0). Stage IIA occurs with any amount of plaques in addition to the ability to pal- pate the lymph node and the lymph uninvolved, reactive, or dermatopathic (T1-2, LN0-2, M0). Treatments applied to the skin are preferred for patients having these preliminary stages of the disease, commonly topical chemotherapy with mechlorethamine hydrochloride (nitrogen mustard) or phototherapy of psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA). Topical chemothera- py involves application to the skin of nitrogen mustard, an alkylating agent, in a concentration of 10–20 mg/dL in an aqueous or ointment base. Treatment of affected skin is suggested at a minimum and application over the entire skin surface is often recommended. Care needs to be taken that coverage of involved skin is adequate, as patients who self-apply the drug often cannot reach all affected areas. The most common side effect is skin hypersensitivity to the drug. Nearly all patients respond favorably to this treatment, with a 32–61% complete response rate, based on amount of skin involvement. Unfortunately, only 10–15% of patients maintain a com- plete response rate after discontinuing the treatment. Phototherapy involves treatment with an orally administered drug, 8-methyloxypsoralen, that renders the skin sensitive to long-wave ultraviolet light (UVA), fol- lowed by controlled exposure to the radiation. During the initial treatment period, which may last as long as six months, patients are treated two to three times weekly. This is reduced to about once monthly after initial clear- ing of the lesions. Redness of the skin and blistering are the most common side effects of the treatment and are much more common in patients presenting with overall skin redness, or erythroderma, so lower intensities of light are usually used in this case. About 50% of all patients experience complete clearance with this treat- ment. Some patients with very fair skin and limited skin involvement can successfully treat themselves at home with special lamps and no psoralen. The next stage, IIB, involves one or more cutaneous tumors, in combination with absent or present palpable lymph nodes, lymph uninvolved, reactive, or dermatopath- ic, and no visceral involvement (T3, LN0-2, M0). Stage III is