None

Coughing—Coughing helps break up secretions in
the lungs so that the mucus can be suctioned out or
expectorated. Patients sit upright and inhale deeply
through the nose. They then exhale in short puffs or
coughs. Coughing is repeated several times per day.
Deep breathing—Deep breathing helps expand the
lungs and forces better distribution of the air into all
sections of the lung. The patient either sits in a chair
or sits upright in bed and inhales, pushing the
abdomen out to force maximum amounts of air into
the lung. The abdomen is then contracted, and the
patient exhales. Deep breathing exercises are done
several times each day for short periods.
Percussion—This consists of rhythmically striking
the chest wall with cupped hands. It is also called
cupping, clapping, or tapotement. The purpose of
percussion is to break up thick secretions in the
lungs so that they can be more easily removed. Per-
cussion is performed on each lung segment for one
to two minutes at a time.
Postural drainage—This technique uses the force of
gravity to assist in effectively draining secretions
from the lungs and into the central airway where
they can either be coughed up or suctioned out. The
patient is placed in a head or chest down position
and is kept in this position for up to 15 minutes. Crit-
ical care patients and those depending on mechani-
cal ventilation receive postural draingage therapy
four to six times daily. Percussion and vibration may
be performed in conjunction with postural drainage.
Turning—Turning from side to side permits lung
expansion. Patients may turn themselves or be
turned by a caregiver. The head of the bed is also
elevated to promote drainage if the patient can tol-
erate this position. Critically ill patients and those
dependent on mechanical respiration are turned
once every one to two hours around the clock.
Vibration—The purpose of vibration is to help
break up lung secretions. Vibration can be either
mechanical or manual. It is performed as the
patient breathes deeply. When done manually, the
person performing the vibration places his or her
hands against the patient’s chest and creates vibra-
tions by quickly contracting and relaxing arm and
shoulder muscles while the patient exhales. The
procedure is repeated several times each day for
about five exhalations.
mechanical or manual. It is performed as the patient
breathes deeply. When done manually, the person per-
forming the vibration places his or her hands against the
patient’s chest and creates vibrations by quickly contract-
ing and relaxing arm and shoulder muscles while the
patient exhales. The procedure is repeated several times
each day for about five exhalations.