Agranulocytosis—An acute febrile condition
marked by severe depression of the granulocyte-
producing bone marrow, and by prostration, chills,
swollen neck, and sore throat sometimes with local
ulceration.
Anorexiant—A drug that suppresses appetite.
Anxiety—Worry or tension in response to real or
imagined stress, danger, or dreaded situations. Physi-
cal reactions, such as fast pulse, sweating, trembling,
fatigue, and weakness, may accompany anxiety.
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)—
A condition in which a person (usually a child) has
an unusually high activity level and a short attention
span. People with the disorder may act impulsively
and may have learning and behavioral problems.
Central nervous system—The brain and spinal cord.
Depression—A mental condition in which people
feel extremely sad and lose interest in life. People
with depression may also have sleep problems and
loss of appetite, and may have trouble concentrat-
ing and carrying out everyday activities.
Leucopenia—A condition in which the number of
leukocytes circulating in the blood is abnormally
low and which is most commonly due to a
decreased production of new cells in conjunction
with various infectious diseases or as a reaction to
various drugs or other chemicals.
Pregnancy category—A system of classifying drugs
according to their established risks for use during
pregnancy. Category A: Controlled human studies
have demonstrated no fetal risk. Category B: Animal
studies indicate no fetal risk, but no human studies,
or adverse effects in animals, but not in well-con-
trolled human studies. Category C: No adequate
human or animal studies, or adverse fetal effects in
animal studies, but no available human data. Cate-
gory D: Evidence of fetal risk, but benefits outweigh
risks. Category X: Evidence of fetal risk. Risks out-
weigh any benefits.
Withdrawal symptoms—A group of physical or
mental symptoms that may occur when a person
suddenly stops using a drug on which he or she has
become dependent.

None