None

blood can collect in the veins, making it difficult for
fluid to move from tissues back into the vessels.
• Heat. Warm temperatures cause the blood vessels to
expand, making it easier for fluid to cross into sur-
rounding tissues. High humidity also aggravates this
situation.
• Medications. Certain drugs, such as steroids, hormone
replacements, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), and some blood pressure medications may
affect how fast fluid leaves blood vessels.
• Intake of salty foods. The body needs a constant con-
centration of salt in its tissues. When excess salt is
taken in, the body dilutes it by retaining fluid.
• Menstruation and pregnancy. The changing levels of
hormones affect the rate at which fluid enters and
leaves the tissues.
Some medical conditions may also cause edema,
including:
• Heart failure. When the heart is unable to maintain
adequate blood flow throughout the circulatory system,
the excess fluid pressure within the blood vessels can
cause shifts into the interstitial spaces. Left-sided heart
failure can cause pulmonary edema, as fluid shifts into
the lungs. The patient may develop rapid, shallow res-
pirations, shortness of breath, and a cough. Right-
sided heart failure can cause pitting edema, a swelling
in the tissue under the skin of the lower legs and feet.
Pressing this tissue with a finger tip leads to a notice-
able momentary indentation.
• Kidney disease. The decrease in sodium and water
excretion can result in fluid retention and overload.
• Thyroid or liver disease. These conditions can change
the concentration of protein in the blood, affecting fluid
movement in and out of the tissues. In advanced liver
disease, the liver is enlarged and fluid may build-up in
the abdomen.
• Malnutrition. Protein levels are decreased in the blood,
and in an effort to maintain a balance of concentrations,
fluid shifts out of the vessels and causes edema in tissue
spaces.
Some conditions that may cause swelling in just one
leg include:
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1134