None

Amniocentesis—A procedure performed at 16-18
weeks of pregnancy in which a needle is inserted
through a woman’s abdomen into her uterus to
draw out a small sample of the amniotic fluid from
around the baby. Either the fluid itself or cells from
the fluid can be used for a variety of tests to obtain
information about genetic disorders and other med-
ical conditions in the fetus.
CGG or CGG sequence—Shorthand for the DNA
sequence: cytosine-guanine-guanine. Cytosine and
guanine are two of the four molecules, otherwise
called nucleic acids, that make up DNA.
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS)—A procedure used
for prenatal diagnosis at 10-12 weeks gestation.
Under ultrasound guidance a needle is inserted
either through the mother’s vagina or abdominal wall
and a sample of cells is collected from around the
early embryo. These cells are then tested for chromo-
some abnormalities or other genetic diseases.
Chromosome—A microscopic thread-like structure
found within each cell of the body and consists of a
complex of proteins and DNA. Humans have 46
chromosomes arranged into 23 pairs. Changes in
either the total number of chromosomes or their
shape and size (structure) may lead to physical or
mental abnormalities.
FMR-1 gene—A gene found on the X chromosome.
Its exact purpose is unknown, but it is suspected
that the gene plays a role in brain development.
Mitral valve prolapse—A heart defect in which one
of the valves of the heart (which normally controls
blood flow) becomes floppy. Mitral valve prolapse
may be detected as a heart murmur but there are
usually no symptoms.
Premutation—A change in a gene that precedes a
mutation; this change does not alter the function of
the gene.
X chromosome—One of the two sex chromo-
somes (the other is Y) containing genetic material
that, among other things, determine a person’s
gender.
aspect fragile X syndrome is that mosaicism is present in
15–20% those affected by the condition. Mosaicism is
when there is the presence of cells of two different genet-
ic materials in the same individual.
The mutation involves a short sequence of DNA in
the FMR-1 gene. This sequence is designated CGG. Nor-
mally, the CGG sequence is repeated between six to 54
times. People who have repeats in this range do not have
fragile X syndrome and are not at increased risk to have
children with fragile X syndrome. Those affected by frag-
ile X syndrome have expanded CGG repeats (over 200) in
the first exon of the FMR1 gene (the full mutation)
Fragile X syndrome inherited in an X-linked domi-
nant manner (characters are transmitted by genes on the X
chromosome). When a man carries a premutation on his
X chromosome, it tends to be stable and usually will not
expand if he passes it on to his daughters (he passes his Y
chromosome to his sons). Thus, all of his daughters will
be premutation carriers like he is. When a woman carries
a premutation, it is unstable and can expand as she passes
it on to her children, therefore a man’s grandchildren are
at greater risk of developing the syndrome. There is a
50% risk for a premutation carrier female to transmit an
abnormal mutation with each pregnancy. The likelihood
for the premutation to expand is related to the number of
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1367