put an infant or car seat in a front passenger seat that
has an air bag. Once they outgrow their forward facing
car seats, children between the ages of four and eight
who weigh between 40–80 lb (18–36 kg) should ride in
a booster seat. Every child who rides in a car over this
age and weight should buckle up with a properly fitted
lap and shoulder belt.
• Teach children pedestrian safety. Younger children
should never be allowed to cross the street by them-
selves, and older kids should know to follow traffic
signs and signals, cross the street at the corner, and look
both ways before stepping off the curb.
• Teach children about personal safety. Kids should know
what to do in case they get lost or are approached by a
stranger. It is also imperative that parents talk openly
with their children about their body and sexuality, and
what behavior is inappropriate, to protect them against
sexual predators.
Child-proofing the household is also an important
step towards keeping kids healthy. To make a house a
safe home:
• Ban guns. Accidental shootings in the home injure an
estimated 1,500 children under age 14 each year. If a
gun must be in the home, it should be securely locked
in a tamper proof box or safe.
• Keep all matches, lighters, and flammable materials
properly stored and out of the reach of children.
• Make sure hot water heaters are set to 120 degrees or
below to prevent scalding injuries.
• Equip the home with working fire extinguishers and
smoke alarms, and teach children what to do in case of
fire.
• Secure all medications (including vitamins, herbs, and
supplements), hazardous chemicals, and poisonous
substances (including alcohol and tobacco).
• Don’t smoke. Aside from causing cancer and other
health problems in smokers, second-hand smoke is haz-
ardous to a child’s health.
• Keep small children away from poisonous plants out-
doors, and remove any indoor plants that are toxic.
• Post the phone numbers of poison control and the pedi-
atrician near the phone, and teach children about dial-
ing 9-1-1 for emergencies.
• Children under age five should never be left alone in the
bathtub, wading pool, or near any standing water
source (including an open toilet). Drowning is the lead-
ing cause of death by injury for children between the
ages of one and four.
• Remove lead paint. Lead is a serious health hazard for
children, and houses built before 1978 should be tested
for lead paint. If lead is found, the paint should be
removed using the appropriate safety precautions.
These safety guidelines are not all-inclusive, and
there are many age-specific safety precautions that par-
ents and guardians of children should observe. For exam-
ple, infants should never be left with a propped-up bottle
in their mouths or given small play items because of the
choking hazards involved.

None