None

Aneurysm—An abnormal dilatation of a blood ves-
sel, usually an artery. It can be caused by a congeni-
tal defect or weakness in the vessel’s wall.
Angiography—In cardiac catheterization, a picture
of the heart and coronary arteries is seen after
injecting a radiopaque substance (often referred to
as a dye) throughout the veins and arteries.
Angioplasty—An alternative to vascular surgery, a
balloon catheter is used to mechanically dilate the
affected area of the artery and enlarge the constrict-
ed or narrowed segment.
Aortic valve—The valve between the heart’s left
ventricle and ascending aorta that prevents regurgi-
tation of blood back into the left ventricle.
Catheter—A tube made of elastic, elastic web, rub-
ber, glass, metal, or plastic used to evacuate or inject
fluids into the body. In cardiac catheterization, a
long, fine catheter is used for passage through a
blood vessel into the chambers of the heart.
Coronary bypass surgery—A surgical procedure
which places a shunt to allow blood to travel from
the aorta to a branch of the coronary artery at a
point past an obstruction.
Left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD)—
One of the heart’s coronary artery branches from
the left main coronary artery which supplies blood
to the left ventricle.
Mitral valve—The bicuspid valve which is between
the left atrium and left ventricle of the heart.
Pulmonary valve—The heart valve which is posi-
tioned between the right ventricle and the opening
into the pulmonary artery.
Shunt—A passageway (or an artificially created pas-
sageway) that diverts blood flow from one main
route to another.
Tricuspid valve—The right atrioventricular valve of
the heart.
A finding of impaired wall motion is an additional
indicator of coronary artery disease, aneurysm, an
enlarged heart, or a congenital heart problem. Using the
findings from an ejection fraction test which measures
wall motion, cardiologists look at an ejection fraction
reading under 35% as increasing the risk of complica-
tions while also decreasing a successful long term or
short term outcome with surgery.
Detecting the difference in pressure above and
below the heart valve can verify heart valve disease. The
greater narrowing correlates with the higher pressure dif-
ference.
To confirm septal defects, a catheterization measures
oxygen content on both the left and right sides of the
heart. The right heart pumps unoxygenated blood to the
lungs, and the left heart pumps blood that contains oxy-
gen from the lungs to the rest of the body. Right side ele-
vated oxygen levels indicate left-to-right atrial or ven-
tricular shunt. A left side that experiences decreased
oxygen indicates a right-to-left shunt.