None

Adenoma—A type of noncancerous (benign)
tumor that often involves the overgrowth of certain
cells of the type normally found within glands.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)—A pituitary
hormone that stimulates the cortex of the adrenal
glands to produce adrenal cortical hormones.
Cortisol—A hormone secreted by the cortex of the
adrenal gland. Cortisol regulates the function of
nearly every organ and tissue in the body.
Ectopic—In an abnormal position.
Endocrine—Pertaining to a gland that secretes
directly into the bloodstream.
Gland—A collection of cells whose function is to
release certain chemicals (hormones) that are
important to the functioning of other, sometimes
distantly located, organs or body systems.
Glucocorticoids—General class of adrenal corti-
cal hormones that are mainly active in protecting
against stress and in protein and carbohydrate
metabolism.
Hormone—A chemical produced in one part of
the body that travels to another part of the body in
order to exert its effect.
Hypothalamus—the part of the brain containing
secretions important to metabolic activities.
Pituitary—A gland located at the base of the
brain, the pituitary produces a number of hor-
mones, including hormones that regulate growth
and reproductive function.
toms are still not specific to Cushing’s syndrome. Fol-
lowing a review of the patient’s medical history, physical
examination, and routine blood tests, a series of more
sophisticated tests is available to achieve a diagnosis.
24-hour free cortisol test
This is the most specific diagnostic test for identify-
ing Cushing’s syndrome. It involves measuring the
amount of cortisol present in the urine over a 24-hour
period. When excess cortisol is present in the blood-
stream, it is processed by the kidneys and removed as
waste in the urine. This 24-hour free cortisol test requires
that an individual collect exactly 24-hours’ worth of
urine in a single container. The urine is then analyzed in
a laboratory to determine the quantity of cortisol present.
This technique can also be paired with the administration
of dexamethasone, which in a normal individual would
cause urine cortisol to be very low. Once a diagnosis has
been made using the 24-hour free cortisol test, other tests
are used to find the exact location of the abnormality
causing excess cortisol production.