DOROTHY ANDERSEN, MD (1901–1963) Dorothy Andersen was born on May 15, 1901, in Asheville, North Carolina. She was the only child of Hans Peter Andersen and the former Mary Louise Mason. Orphaned as a young adult, Andersen put herself through Saint Johnsbury Academy and Mount Holyoke College before enrolling in the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, from which she received her M.D. in 1926. Andersen turned instead to medical research as a pathologist at Babies Hospital of the Columbia-Presbyter- ian Medical Center in New York City, where she stayed for more than 20 years, eventually becoming chief of patholo- gy in 1952. Andersen is probably best known for discovery of cystic fibrosis in 1935. That discovery came about during the postmortem examination of a child who had supposed- ly died of celiac disease, a nutritional disorder. She searched for similar cases in the autopsy files and in med- ical literature, eventually realizing that she had found a dis- ease that had never been described and to which she gave the name cystic fibrosis. (Library of Congress) Meconium is the first dark stool that a baby passes after birth; ileus is an obstruction of the digestive tract. The meconium of a newborn with meconium ileus is thick- ened and sticky, due to the presence of thickened mucus from the intestinal glands. Meconium ileus causes abdominal swelling and vomiting, and often requires surgery immediately after birth. Presence of meconium ileus is considered highly indicative of CF. Borderline cases may be misdiagnosed, however, and attributed instead to “milk allergy.” Other abdominal symptoms are caused by the inabil- ity of the pancreas to supply digestive enzymes to the intestine. During normal digestion, as food passes from the stomach into the small intestine, it is mixed with pan- creatic secretions which help to break down the nutrients for absorption. While the intestines themselves also pro- vide some digestive enzymes, the pancreas is the major source of enzymes for the digestion of all types of foods, especially fats and proteins. In CF, thick mucus blocks the pancreatic duct, which is eventually closed off completely by scar tissue formation, leading to a condition known as pancreatic insufficiency. Without pancreatic enzymes, large amounts of undigested food pass into the large intes- tine. Bacterial action on this rich food source can cause gas and abdominal swelling. The large amount of fat remaining in the feces makes it bulky, oily, and foul- smelling. Because nutrients are only poorly digested and absorbed, the person with CF is often ravenously hungry, underweight, and shorter than expected for his age. When CF is not treated for a longer period, a child may develop symptoms of malnutrition, including anemia, bloating, and, paradoxically, appetite loss. Diabetes becomes increasingly likely as a person with CF ages. Scarring of the pancreas slowly destroys those pancreatic cells which produce insulin, producing type I, or insulin-dependent diabetes. Gall stones affect approximately 10% of adults with CF. Liver problems are less common, but can be caused by the buildup of