None

Dieters should be cautious about plans that severely
restrict the size of food portions, or that eliminate entire
food groups from the diet. It is highly probable that they
will become discouraged and drop out of such programs.
The best diet is one that can be maintained indefinitely
without ill effects, that offers sufficient variety and bal-
ance to provide everything needed for good health, and
that is considerate of personal food preferences.
Low-fat diets are not recommended for children
under the age of two. Young children need extra fat to
maintain their active, growing bodies. Fat intake may be
gradually reduced between the ages of two and five, after
which it should be limited to a maximum of 30% of total
calories through adulthood. Saturated fat should be
restricted to no more than 10% of total calories.
Weight-loss dieters should be wary of the “yo-yo”
effect that occurs when numerous attempts are made to
reduce weight using high-risk, quick-fix diets. This con-
tinued “cycling” between weight loss and weight gain
can slow the basal metabolic rate and can sometimes lead
to eating disorders. The dieter may become discouraged
and frustrated by this success/failure cycle. The end
result of “yo-yo” dieting is that it becomes more difficult
to maintain a healthy weight.
Caution should also be exercised about weight-loss
diets that require continued purchases of special prepack-
aged foods. Not only do these tend to be costly and over-
processed, they may also prevent dieters from learning
the food-selection and preparation skills essential to
maintenance of weight loss. Further, dieters should con-
sider whether they want to carry these special foods to
work, restaurants, or homes of friends.
Concern has been expressed about weight-loss diet
plans that do not include exercise, considered essential
to long-term weight management. Some diets and sup-
plements may be inadvisable for patients with special
conditions or situations.
Certain fad diets purporting to be official diets of
groups such as the American Heart Association and the
Mayo Clinic are in no way endorsed by those institu-
tions. Patients thinking of starting such a diet should
check with the institution to ensure its name has not been
misappropriated by an unscrupulous practitioner.