plex genetic program coordinates the formation, growth,
and migration of billions of neurons, or nerve cells, and
their development into discrete, interacting brain
regions. Interruption of this program, especially early in
development, can cause structural defects in the brain.
In addition, normal brain formation requires proper
development of the surrounding skull, and skull defects
may lead to brain malformation. Congenital brain
defects may be caused by inherited genetic defects,
spontaneous mutations within the genes of the embryo,
or effects on the embryo due to the mother’s infection,
trauma, or drug use.
Early on in development, a flat strip of tissue
along the back of the fetus rolls up to form a tube. This
so-called “neural tube” develops into the spinal cord,
and at one end, the brain. Closure of the tube is
required for subsequent development of the tissue
within. Anencephaly (literally “without brain”), results
when the topmost portion of the tube fails to close.
Anencephaly is the most common severe malformation
seen in stillborn births. It is about four times more
common in females than males. Anencephaly is some-
times seen to run in families, and for parents who have
conceived one anencephalic fetus, the risk of a second
is as high as 5%. Fewer than half of babies with anen-
cephaly are born alive, and survival beyond the first
month is rare.
Encephalocele is a protrusion of part of the brain
through a defect in the skull. The most common site for
encephalocele is along the front-to-back midline of the
skull, usually at the rear, although frontal encephaloceles
are more common among Asians. Pressure within the
skull pushes out cranial tissue. The protective layer over
the brain, the meninges, grows to cover the protrusion, as
does skin in some cases. Defects in skull closure are
thought to cause some cases of encephalocele, while
defects in neural tube closure may cause others.
Encephaloceles may be small and contain little or no
brain tissue, or may be quite large and contain a signifi-
cant fraction of the brain.
Failure of neural-tube closure below the level of
the brain prevents full development of the surrounding
vertebral bones and leads to spina bifida, or a divided
spinal column. Incomplete closure causes protrusion
of the spinal cord and meninges, called meningomye-
locele. Some cases of spina bifida are accompanied by
another defect at the base of the brain, known as the
Arnold-Chiari malformation or Chiari II malforma-
tion. For reasons that are unclear, part of the cerebel-
lum is displaced downward into the spinal column.

None