Atherosclerosis—A build-up of fatty substances in
the inner layers of the arteries.
Estrogen—A hormone that stimulates develop-
ment of female secondary sex characteristics.
Glycemic—The presence of glucose in the blood.
Hypertension—Abnormally high blood pressure
in the arteries.
Legumes—A family of plants that bear edible
seeds in pods, including beans and peas.
Lipid—Any of a variety of substances that, along
with proteins and carbohydrates, make up the
main structural components of living cells.
Polyunsaturated fats—A non-animal oil or fatty
acid rich in unsaturated chemical bonds not associ-
ated with the formation of cholesterol in the blood.
ans. The vegetarian low-cholesterol diet consists of at
least six servings of whole grain foods, three or more
servings of green leafy vegetables, two to four servings
of fruit, two to four servings of legumes, and one or two
servings of non-fat dairy products daily.
A second diet is the Asian diet, with brown rice
being the staple. Other allowable foods include fish, veg-
etables such as bok choy, bean sprouts, and black beans.
It allows for one weekly serving of meat and very few
dairy products. The food is flavored with traditional
Asian spices and condiments, such as ginger, chilies,
turmeric, and soy sauce.
Another regimen is the low glycemic or diabetic
diet, which can raise the HDL (good cholesterol) level by
as much as 20% in three weeks. Low glycemic foods
promote a slow but steady rise in blood sugar levels fol-
lowing a meal, which increases the level of HDL. They
also lower total cholesterol and triglycerides. Low
glycemic foods include certain fruits, vegetables, beans,
and whole grains. Processed and refined foods and sug-
ars should be avoided.
Exercise is an extremely important part of lowering
bad cholesterol and raising good cholesterol. It should
consist of 20–30 minutes of vigorous aerobic exercise at
least three times a week. Exercises that cause the heart to
beat faster include fast walking, bicycling, jogging, roller
skating, swimming, and walking up stairs. There are also
a wide selection of aerobic programs available at gyms
or on videocassette.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
787
Cholesterol, high

None