Biopsy—Removal of sample of abnormal tissue for
more extensive examination under a microscope.
Cervix—The neck of the uterus.
Cryosurgery—Freezing and destroying abnormal
cells.
DES—The abbreviation for diethylstilbestrol, a
synthetic form of estrogen that was widely pre-
scribed to women from 1940 to 1970 to prevent
complications. It was linked to several serious
birth defects and disorders of the reproductive sys-
tem in daughters of women who took DES. In
1971, the FDA suggested it not be used during
pregnancy and banned its use in 1979 as a growth
promoter in livestock.
Diathermy—Also called electrocautery, this is a
procedure that heats and destroys abnormal cells.
It is gradually being replaced by cryosurgery,
lasers, or LEEP.
Human papilloma virus—A virus that causes com-
mon warts of the hands and feet, as well as lesions
in the genital and vaginal area. More than 50
types of HPV have been identified, some of which
are linked to cancerous and precancerous condi-
tions, including cancer of the cervix.
Loop electrosurgical excision (LEEP)—A proce-
dure that can help diagnose and treat cervical
abnormalities, using a thin wire loop that emits a
low-voltage high-frequency radio wave that can
excise tissue. It is considered better than either
lasers or electrocautery because it can both diag-
nose and treat precancerous cells or early stage
cancer at the same time.
PAP test—The common term for the Papanicolaou
test, a simple smear method of examining stained
cells to detect cancer of the cervix.
Speculum—A retractor used to separate the walls
of the vagina to make visual examination easier.
doctor applies Monsel’s solution to the area to stop the
bleeding. When this mixes with blood it creates a black
fluid that looks like coffee grounds for a couple of days
after the procedure. It is also normal to have some spot-
ting after a colposcopy.
Patients should not use tampons or put anything else
in the vagina for at least a week after the procedure, or
until the doctor says it’s safe. In addition, women should
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
865

None