None

Over 32 million people in the United States wear
these small lenses that fit on top of the cornea. They pro-
vide a field of view unobstructed by eyeglass frames;
they do not fog-up or get splattered, so it is possible to
see well while walking in the rain; and they are less
noticeable than any eyeglass style. On the other hand,
they take time to get accustomed to; require more mea-
surements for fitting; require many follow-up visits to
the eye doctor; can lead to complications such as infec-
tions and corneal damage; and may not correct astigma-
tism as well as eyeglasses, especially if the astigmatism
is severe.
Originally, hard contact lenses were made of a mate-
rial called PMMA. Although still available, the more
common types of contact lenses are listed below:
• Rigid gas-permeable (RGP) daily-wear lenses are made
of plastic that does not absorb water but allows oxygen
to get from the atmosphere to the cornea. (This is
important because the cornea has no blood supply and
needs to get its oxygen from the atmosphere through
the film of tears that moves beneath the lens.) They
must be removed and cleaned each night.
• Rigid gas-permeable (RGP) extended-wear lenses are
made from plastic that also does not absorb water but is
more permeable to oxygen than the plastic used for
daily-wear lenses. They can be worn up to a week.
• Daily wear soft lenses are made of plastic that is per-
meable to oxygen and absorbs water; therefore, they
are soft and flexible. These lenses must be removed
and cleaned each night, and they do not correct all
vision problems. Soft lenses are easier to get used to
than rigid lenses, but are more prone to tears and do
not last as long.
• Extended-wear soft lenses are highly permeable to oxy-
gen, are flexible by virtue of their ability to absorb
water, and can usually be worn for up to one week.
They do not correct all vision problems. There is more
of a risk of infection with extended-wear lenses than
with daily-wear lenses.
• Extended-wear disposable lenses are soft lenses worn
continually for up to six days and then discarded, with
no need for cleaning.
• Planned-replacement soft lenses are daily wear lenses
that are replaced on a regular schedule, which is usually
every two weeks, monthly, or quarterly. They must also
be cleaned.
Soft contact lenses come in a variety of materials.
There are also different kinds of RGP and soft multifocal
contact lenses available. Monovision, where one contact
lens corrects for distance vision while the other corrects
for near vision, may be an option for presbyopic patients.
Monovision, however, may affect depth perception and
may not be appropriate for everyone. Contact lenses also
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1267