None

Each person actually has two copies of each gene,
including the CFTR gene, in each of their body cells. Dur-
ing sperm and egg production, however, these two copies
separate, so that each sperm or egg contains only one copy
of each gene. When sperm and egg unite, the newly creat-
ed cell once again has two copies of each gene.
The two gene copies may be the same or they may
be slightly different. For the CFTR gene, for instance, a
person may have two normal copies, or one normal and
one mutated copy, or two mutated copies. A person with
two mutated copies will develop cystic fibrosis. A person
with one mutated copy is said to be a carrier. A carrier
will not have symptoms of CF, but can pass on the mutat-
ed CFTR gene to his/her children.
When two carriers have children, they have a one in
four chance of having a child with CF each time they
conceive. They have a two in four chance of having a
child who is a carrier, and a one in four chance of having
a child with two normal CFTR genes.
Approximately one in every 25 Americans of north-
ern-European descent is a carrier of the mutated CF
gene, while only one in 17,000 African Americans and
one in 30,000 Asian Americans are carriers. Since carri-
ers are symptom-free, very few people will know
whether or not they are carriers unless there is a family
history of the disease. Two white Americans with no
family history of CF have a one in 2,500 chance of hav-
ing a child with CF.
It may seem puzzling that a mutated gene with such
harmful consequences would remain so common; one
might guess that the high mortality of CF would quickly
lead to loss of the mutated gene from the population.
Some researchers now believe the reason for the persis-
tence of the CF gene is that carriers, those with only one
copy of the gene, are protected from the full effects of
cholera, a microorganism that infects the intestine, caus-
ing intense diarrhea and eventual death by dehydra-
tion. It is believed that having one copy of the CF gene is
enough to prevent the full effects of cholera infection,
while not enough to cause the symptoms of CF. This so-
called “heterozygote advantage” is seen in some other
genetic disorders, including sickle-cell anemia.