None

Perhaps the most famous and widely used system is
the Bach flower remedies. This system originated in the
1920s when British physician and bacteriologist, Dr.
Edward Bach (1886–1936), noticed that patients with
physical complaints often seemed to be suffering from
anxiety or some kind of negative emotion. He concluded
that assessing a patient’s emotional disposition and pre-
scribing an appropriate flower essence could treat the
physical illness. Bach was a qualified medical doctor, but
he also practiced homeopathy.
As a result of his own serious illness in 1917, Bach
began a search for a new and simple system of medicine
that would treat the whole person. In 1930, he gave up his
flourishing practice on Harley Street at the Royal London
Homeopathic Hospital and moved to the countryside to
devote his life to this research. It is known that at this
point, he ceased to dispense the mixture of homeopathy
and allopathic medicine that he had been using. Instead, he
began investigating the healing properties of plant
essences and discovered that he possessed an “intuition”
for judging the properties of each flower. Accordingly, he
developed the system of treatment that bears his name, and
is also the foundation for all other flower-remedy systems.
The Bach Flower Remedies were ostensibly the only
system of significance from the 1920s until in the 1970s,
when there was a renewed interest in the subject by doc-
tors working in the field of natural medicine. Perhaps the
most notable was Dr. Richard Katz, who was seeking new
methods of dealing with modern stress and the resulting
ailments. He focused on the concept of a psychic, psycho-
logical effect and chose to pursue this line of research.
In 1979, Katz founded the Flower Essence Society
in California, (FES). This society pledged to further the
research and development of Bach’s principles. As of
2000, FES hosts a database of over 100 flower essences
from more than 50 countries. FES is now an international
organization of health practitioners, researchers, stu-
dents, and others concerned with flower essence therapy.
The Society has connections with an estimated
50,000 active practitioners from around the world, who
use flower essence therapy as part of their treatment. FES
encourages the study of the plants themselves to deter-
mine the characteristics of flower essences. They are
compiling an extensive database of case studies and prac-
titioner reports of the use of essences therapeutically,
allowing verification and development of the original
definitions. They are also engaged in the scientific study
of flower essence therapy.
FES says they have developed the theories of Paracel-
sus and Goethe who researched the “signatures” and “ges-
tures” of botanical specimens, on the premise that the
human body and soul are a reflection of the system of
nature. FES plant research interprets the therapeutic prop-
erties of flower essences according to these insights.
In this regard, they have devised 12 “windows of
perception” for monitoring the attributes of plants. Each
of these windows reveals an aspect of the plant’s quali-
ties, although they maintain that what they are seeking is
a “whole which is greater than the sum of its parts.” The
12 windows are not considered independent classifica-
tions, but more of a blended tapestry of views of the
qualities that each plant possesses.
The first window is concerned with the “form” of a
plant—its shape classification. The second focuses on its
“gesture” or spatial relationship. The third window is a
plant’s botanical classification; the Flower Essence Soci-
ety maintains that considering a plant’s botanical family
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1338