None

Type I diabetes, sometimes called juvenile diabetes,
begins most commonly in childhood or adolescence. In
this form of diabetes, the body produces little or no
insulin. It is characterized by a sudden onset and occurs
more frequently in populations descended from Northern
European countries (Finland, Scotland, Scandinavia) than
in those from Southern European countries, the Middle
East, or Asia. In the United States, approximately three
people in 1,000 develop Type I diabetes. This form is also
called insulin-dependent diabetes because people who
develop this type need to have daily injections of insulin.
Brittle diabetics are a subgroup of Type I where
patients have frequent and rapid swings of blood sugar
levels between hyperglycemia (a condition where there is
too much glucose or sugar in the blood) and hypo-
glycemia (a condition where there is abnormally low lev-
els of glucose or sugar in the blood). These patients may
require several injections of different types of insulin
during the day to keep the blood sugar level within a fair-
ly normal range.
The more common form of diabetes, Type II, occurs
in approximately 3–5% of Americans under 50 years of
age, and increases to 10–15% in those over 50. More
than 90% of the diabetics in the United States are Type II
diabetics. Sometimes called age-onset or adult-onset dia-
betes, this form of diabetes occurs most often in people
who are overweight and who do not exercise. It is also
more common in people of Native American, Hispanic,
and African-American descent. People who have migrat-
ed to Western cultures from East India, Japan, and Aus-
tralian Aboriginal cultures are also more likely to devel-
op Type II diabetes than those who remain in their origi-
nal countries.
Type II is considered a milder form of diabetes
because of its slow onset (sometimes developing over the
course of several years) and because it can usually be
controlled with diet and oral medication. The conse-
quences of uncontrolled and untreated Type II diabetes,
however, are the just as serious as those for Type I. This
form is also called noninsulin-dependent diabetes, a term
that is somewhat misleading. Many people with Type II
diabetes can control the condition with diet and oral
medications, however, insulin injections are sometimes
necessary if treatment with diet and oral medication is
not working.
Another form of diabetes called gestational dia-
betes can develop during pregnancy and generally
resolves after the baby is delivered. This diabetic condi-
tion develops during the second or third trimester of
pregnancy in about 2% of pregnancies. The condition is
usually treated by diet, however, insulin injections may
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1048