The abnormal portion of the gene that causes FAP in
most patients can be detected. A blood test can then be
performed which identifies family members who have the
same mutation. They will eventually develop the condi-
tion. Children who have a parent with FAP, and siblings of
affected patients whose parental history is incomplete,
should be evaluated. The polyps characteristic of FAP
have been found in children as young as age five. Testing
of appropriate individuals should take place as soon as the
diagnosis of FAP is established in one member of a family.
Relatives of people with diagnosed FAP should
exercise caution regarding where they seek advice and
testing. One study of a commercially available blood test
found that less than 20% of patients received any genetic
counseling, and almost one third of their physicians mis-
interpreted the test results.
Registries for FAP patients can be found at many
sites in the United States. Such a registry specializes in
identification, assistance, and education of people with a
particular disease, and is usually a separate department in
a research hospital. A team of health professionals who
have expertise in the disorder staff the registry.
Testing within a research setting and/or at a facility
with a registry of patients with FAP is more likely to
safeguard against problems, such as the misunderstand-
ing of test results. As part of a research project, some-
times counseling as well as blood tests are available at no
charge to the patient. Insurance coverage varies. Con-
cerns about confidentiality, and future insurance and
employment discrimination, may prompt individuals to
pay for the examination out of pocket. Commercial blood
tests cost approximately $250 per sample.
If the abnormal gene is found in a family member,
annual screening for colon polyps is recommended,
beginning at age 11. Flexible sigmoidoscopy is used for
this examination. It is usually done in a physician’s
office, or in a hospital department, most often by a gas-
troenterologist or a surgeon. Food intake may be restrict-
ed for 24 hours prior to the procedure. Before the study,
the intestine is cleared of stool by one or more small ene-
mas. Some physicians prefer to sedate the patient, to
help them relax. Then a flexible, lighted, hollow tube
(sigmoidoscope) is inserted into the anus and maneu-
vered into the large intestine. The physician examines the
wall of the colon to look for polyps. If polyps are found,
one or more may be removed for biopsy.
Most patients report little discomfort during the
examination. The procedure itself takes five to fifteen
minutes. The patient may be at the facility an hour, or
more, if recovery from sedation is needed. If no medica-
tion was administered, driving and resumption of normal
activities are permitted immediately. The cost of the pro-
cedure varies widely, but, as of 1997, it was covered by
Medicare, indicating the likelihood of other types of
insurance coverage.
In some cases the portion of the gene responsible for
FAP cannot be identified. Family members of these
patients cannot have a predictive blood test. The current
recommendation is for these patients to have the same
annual examination with flexible sigmoidoscopy as
patients with a diagnosed FAP gene. A noninvasive
screening eye examination to detect CHRPE, associated
with FAP, may also be performed.

None