None

Chorionic villi—Microscopic, finger-like projec-
tions that emerge from the outer sac which sur-
rounds the developing baby. Chorionic villi are of
fetal origin and eventually form the placenta.
Chromosomes—Human cells carry DNA in tightly
compressed rod-like structures called chromo-
somes. Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes
including the sex chromosomes.
Down syndrome—A chromosomal disorder
caused by an extra copy or a rearrangement of
chromosome 21. Children with Down syndrome
have varying degrees of mental retardation and
may have heart defects.
Fetus—Term for an unborn baby after the eighth
week of pregnancy. Prior to seven weeks, it is
called an embryo.
Rh sensitization—A woman with a negative blood
type (Rh negative) who has produced antibodies
against her fetus with a positive blood type (Rh
positive). The mother’s body considered the fetal
blood cells a foreign object and mounted an
immune attack on it.
Ultrasound—A safe, painless procedure which
uses sound waves to visualize internal organs. A
wand that transmits and receives the sound waves
is moved over the woman’s abdomen and internal
organs can be seen on a video screen.
oratory, the sample is examined under the microscope and
any contaminating cells or material is carefully removed.
The villi can be analyzed immediately, or incubated for a
day or more to allow for cell division. The cells are
stopped in the midst of cell division and spread onto a
microscope slide. Cells with clearly separated chromo-
somes are photographed so that the type and number of
chromosomes can be analyzed. Chromosomes are strings
of DNA which have been tightly compressed. Humans
have 23 pairs of chromosomes including the sex chromo-
somes. Rearrangements of the chromosomes or the pres-
ence of additional or fewer chromosomes can be identified
by examination of the photograph. Down syndrome, for
instance, is caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21. In
addition to the chromosomal analysis, specialized tests can
be performed as needed to look for specific diseases such
as Tay-Sachs disease. Depending upon which tests are
performed, results may be available as early as two days or
up to eight days after the procedure.
Chorionic villus sampling costs between $1,200 and
$1,800. Insurance coverage for this test may vary.