Different kinds of drugs are used for different pur-
poses in supportive cancer therapy. To relieve nausea
and vomiting, a physician may prescribe dolasetron
(Anzemet), granisetron (Kytril) or ondansetron (Zofran).
Drugs called colony stimulating factors are used to help
the bone marrow make new white blood cells to replace
those destroyed by cancer treatment. Examples of colony
stimulating factors are filgrastim (Neupogen) and sar-
gramostim (Leukine). Another type of drug, epoetin
(Epogen, Procrit), stimulates the bone marrow to make
new red blood cells. It is a synthetically made version of
human erythropoietin that is made naturally in the body
and has the same effect on bone marrow.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
642
Cancer therapy, supportive
Some physicians who treat cancer recommend that
their patients use marijuana to relieve nausea and vom-
iting. This practice is controversial for several reasons.
Using marijuana, even for medicinal purposes, is illegal
in most states. Also, most of the evidence that marijuana
effectively relieves nausea and vomiting comes from
reports of people who have used it, not from carefully
designed scientific studies. An oral medication that con-
tains one of the active ingredients of marijuana is avail-
able with a physician’s prescription and sometimes is
used to treat nausea and vomiting in patients undergoing
cancer treatment. However, the drug, dronabinol (Mari-
nol), takes longer to work than smoked marijuana and
may be difficult for patients with nausea and vomiting to
swallow and keep down.
In 1997, the National Institutes of Health issued a
report calling for more research into medical uses of
marijuana. The panel of experts who wrote the report
also recommended that researchers investigate other
ways of getting the active ingredients of marijuana into
the body, such as nasal sprays, skin patches and inhalers.
Patients who want to use marijuana to relieve side
effects of cancer treatment should talk to their physicians
and should carefully consider the benefits and risks, both
medical and legal.

None