None

der (CFIDS), myalgic encephalomyelitis, low natural
killer cell disease, post-viral syndrome, Epstein-Barr dis-
ease, and Yuppie flu. CFS has so many names because
researchers have been unable to find out exactly what
causes it and because there are many similar, overlapping
conditions. Reports of a CFS-like syndrome called
neurasthenia date back to 1869. Later, people with simi-
lar symptoms were said to have fibromyalgia because
one of the main symptoms is myalgia, or muscle pain.
Because of the similarity of symptoms, fibromyalgia and
CFS are considered to be overlapping syndromes.
In the early to mid-1980s, there were outbreaks of
CFS in some areas of the United States. Doctors found that
many people with CFS had high levels of antibodies to the
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), which causes mononucleosis, in
their blood. For a while they thought they had found the
culprit, but it turned out that many healthy people also had
high EBV antibodies. Scientists have also found high levels
of other viral antibodies in the blood of people with CFS.
These findings have led many scientists to believe that a
virus or combination of viruses may trigger CFS.
CFS was sometimes referred to as Yuppie flu because
it seemed to often affect young, middle-class profession-
als. In fact, CFS can affect people of any gender, age,
race, or socioeconomic group. Although anyone can get
CFS, most patients diagnosed with CFS are 25–45 years
old, and about 80% of cases are in women. Estimates of
how many people are afflicted with CFS vary due to the
similarity of CFS symptoms to other diseases and the dif-
ficulty in identifying it. The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) has estimated that four to 10 peo-
ple per 100,000 in the United States have CFS. According
to the CFIDS Foundation, about 500,000 adults in the
United States (0.3% of the population) have CFS. This
probably is a low estimate since these figures do not
include children and are based on the CDC definition of
CFS, which is very strict for research purposes.