None

Chemotherapy drugs are toxic to normal cells as
well as cancer cells. A dose that will destroy cancer cells
will probably cause damage to some normal cells. Doc-
tors adjust doses to do the least amount of harm possible
to normal cells. Some patients feel few or no side effects,
and others may have more serious side effects. In some
cases, a dose adjustment is all that is needed to reduce or
stop a side effect.
Some chemotherapy drugs have more side effects
than others. Some of the most common side effects are:
• nausea and vomiting
• loss of appetite
• hair loss
• anemia and fatigue
• infection
• easy bleeding or bruising
• sores in the mouth and throat
• neuropathy and other damage to the nervous system
• kidney damage
Nausea and vomiting are common, but can usually
be controlled by taking antinausea drugs, drinking
enough fluids, and avoiding spicy foods. Loss of appetite
may be due to nausea or the stress of undergoing cancer
treatment.
Some chemotherapy drugs cause hair loss, but it is
almost always temporary.
Low blood cell counts caused by the effect of
chemotherapy on the bone marrow can lead to anemia,
infections, and easy bleeding and bruising. Patients with
anemia have too few red blood cells to deliver oxygen
and nutrients to the body’s tissues. Anemic patients feel
tired and weak. If red blood cell levels fall too low, a
blood transfusion may be given.
Patients receiving chemotherapy are more likely to
get infections. This happens because their infection-
fighting white blood cells are reduced. It is important to
take measures to avoid getting infections. When the
white blood cell count drops too low, the doctor may pre-
scribe medications called colony stimulating factors that
help white blood cells grow. Neupogen and Leukine are
two colony stimulants used as treatments to help fight
infection.
Platelets are blood cells that make the blood clot.
When patients do not have enough platelets, they may
bleed or bruise easily, even from small injuries. Patients
with low blood platelets should take precautions to avoid
injuries. Medicines such as aspirin and other pain reliev-
ers can affect platelets and slow down the clotting process.
Chemotherapy can cause irritation and dryness in the
mouth and throat. Painful sores may form that can bleed
and become infected. Precautions to avoid this side effect
include getting dental care before chemotherapy begins,
brushing the teeth and gums regularly with a soft brush,
and avoiding mouth washes that contain salt or alcohol.