None

The only treatment for celiac disease is a gluten-free
diet. This may be easy for the doctor to prescribe, but dif-
ficult for the patient to follow. For most people, adhering
to this diet will stop symptoms and prevent damage to the
intestines. Damaged villi can be functional again in three
to six months. This diet must be followed for life. For
people whose symptoms are cured by the gluten-free diet,
this is further evidence that their diagnosis is correct.
Gluten is present in any product that contains wheat,
rye, barley, or oats. It helps make bread rise, and gives
many foods a smooth, pleasing texture. In addition to the
many obvious places gluten can be found in a normal
diet, such as breads, cereals, and pasta, there are many
hidden sources of gluten. These include ingredients
added to foods to improve texture or enhance flavor and
products used in food packaging. Gluten may even be
present on surfaces used for food preparation or cooking.
Fresh foods that have not been artificially processed,
such as fruits, vegetables, and meats, are permitted as
part of a GFD. Gluten-free foods can be found in health
food stores and in some supermarkets. Mail-order food
companies often have a selection of gluten-free products.
Help in dietary planning is available from dieticians
(healthcare professionals specializing in food and nutri-
tion) or from support groups for individuals with celiac
disease. There are many cookbooks on the market specif-
ically for those on a GFD.
Treating celiac disease with a GFD is almost always
completely effective. Gastrointestinal complaints and
other symptoms are alleviated. Secondary complications,
such as anemia and osteoporosis, resolve in almost all
patients. People who have experienced lactose intoler-
ance related to their celiac disease usually see those
symptoms subside, as well. Although there is no risk and
much potential benefit to this treatment, it is clear that
avoiding all foods containing gluten can be difficult.
Experts emphasize the need for lifelong adherence to
the GFD to avoid the long-term complications of this dis-
order. They point out that although the disease may have
symptom-free periods if the diet is not followed, silent
damage continues to occur. Celiac disease cannot be “out-
grown” or cured, according to medical authorities.