None

Crown—1 The natural part of the tooth covered by
enamel. 2 A restorative crown is a protective shell
that fits over a tooth.
Eruption—The process of a tooth breaking through
the gum tissue to grow into place in the mouth.
Evulsion—The forceful, and usually accidental,
removal of a tooth from its socket in the bone.
Extraction—The surgical removal of a tooth from
its socket in the bone.
Malocclusion—A problem in the way the upper
and lower teeth fit together in biting or chewing.
Pulp—The soft innermost layer of a tooth contain-
ing blood vessels and nerves.
Root canal treatment—The process of removing
diseased or damaged pulp from a tooth, then fill-
ing and sealing the pulp chamber and root canals.
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ)—The jaw joint
formed by the mandible (lower jaw bone) moving
against the temporal (temple and side) bone of the
skull.
porcelain crown. If the pulp has been seriously damaged,
the tooth will require root canal treatment before it
receives a crown. A tooth that is vertically fractured or
fractured below the gumline will require root canal treat-
ment and protective restoration. A tooth which no longer
has enough remaining structure to retain a crown may
have to be extracted (surgically removed).
When a permanent tooth has been knocked out, it
may be saved with prompt action. The tooth must be
found immediately after it has been lost. It should be
picked up by the natural crown (the top part covered by
hard enamel). It must not be handled by the root. If the
tooth is dirty, it may be gently rinsed under running
water. It should never be scrubbed, and it should never be
washed with soap, toothpaste, mouthwash, or other
chemicals. The tooth should not be dried or wrapped in a
tissue or cloth. It must be kept moist at all times.
The tooth may be placed in a clean container of
milk, cool water with or without a pinch of salt, or in
saliva. If possible, the patient and the tooth should be
brought to the dentist within 30 minutes of the tooth
loss. Rapid action improves the chances of successful
re-implantation; however, it is possible to save a tooth
after 30 minutes, if the tooth has been kept moist and
handled properly.
The body usually rejects re-implantation of a prima-
ry (baby) tooth. In this case, the empty socket is treated
as a soft tissue injury and monitored until the permanent
tooth erupts.
A broken jaw must be set back into its proper posi-
tion and stabilized with wires while it heals. Healing may
take six weeks or longer, depending on the patient’s age
and the severity of the fracture.