Enteroviruses are believed to be the cause of at least
10 distinct illnesses. Once they enter the body, they mul-
tiply in the cells that line the gastrointestinal tract, and
eventually reach sites of lymphatic tissue (such as the
tonsils). While most of these diseases are of short dura-
tion and do not cause significant injury, some can pro-
duce severe illness.
The main syndromes caused by the various entero-
viruses are the following:
• Summer grippe (nonspecific febrile illness). This is the
most common syndrome, and is characterized by flu-
like symptoms of fever, headache, and weakness, that
typically last three to four days. Many patients also
develop upper respiratory symptoms and some nausea
and vomiting. One of the major ways to distinguish
this disease from influenza, is the fact that grippe most
often occurs in the summer.
• Generalized disease of the newborn is a potentially
serious infection in which infants from one week to
three months of age develop a syndrome that can be
difficult to distinguish from a severe bacterial infection.
Fever, irritability, and decreased responsiveness or
excessive sleepiness are the major symptoms. Inflam-
mation of heart muscle (myocarditis), low blood pres-
sure, hepatitis, and meningitis sometimes complicate
the illness.
• Aseptic meningitis encephalitis is a well known syn-
drome caused by this group of viruses. In fact,
enteroviruses are responsible for over 90% of cases of
aseptic meningitis, and most often hits children and
young adults. Headache, fever, avoidance of light, and
eye pain are characteristic. Drowsiness may be promi-
nent, and other symptoms include sore throat, cough,
muscle pain, and rash. Occasionally, not only the
meninges—the covering around the brain and spinal
cord— is infected, but also brain tissue itself, produc-
ing encephalitis. The illness resolves after about a week
or so, and permanent damage is unusual. Enteroviruses
can also produce the Guillian-Barré syndrome, which
involves weakness and paralysis of the extremities and
even the muscles of respiration.
• Pleurodynia (Bornholm’s disease) is due to viral infec-
tion and inflammation of the chest and abdominal mus-
cles used for breathing. Pain occurs as acute episodes,
lasting 30 minutes or so. Coxsackie B virus is the usual
cause of the illness.
• Myocarditis and/or pericarditis involves infection of
the heart muscle (myocardium) and the covering
around the heart (pericardium). Infants and young
adults are the most susceptible, and for some reason,
over two-thirds of cases occur in males. The disease
usually begins as an upper respiratory tract infection
with cough, shortness of breath, and fever. Chest pain,
increasing shortness of breath, irregularities of cardiac
rhythm, and heart failure sometimes develop. Some
patients wind up with long term heart failure if the heart
muscle is significantly affected.
• Exanthems is the medical term for rashes, and
enterovirus is the number one cause of summer and fall
rashes in children. They occur anywhere on the body,
and often resemble diseases such as measles.
• Hand-foot-and-mouth disease occurs initially as a sore
throat (often involving the tongue as well), and is fol-
lowed by a rash on the hands, and sometimes the feet.
The rash often forms small blisters, which lead to
ulcers. Symptoms generally resolve within a week. A
specific Coxsackievirus (A16) is the most frequent
cause of this highly infectious disease.
• Herpangina is most often caused by one of the Cox-
sackie A viruses, and appears as the acute onset of fever
and sore throat. This last symptom is particularly
severe, as the virus produces multiple ulcers in the
throat. Swallowing becomes very painful; symptoms
can persist for several weeks.
• Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis involves viral infec-
tion of the conjunctiva, which is a covering around the
eye. Pain, blurred vision, aversion to light, and a dis-
charge from the eye are the main symptoms. Headache
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1212

None