Treatment methods for emphysema do not cure or
reverse the damage to the lungs. However, they may slow
the progression of the disease, relieve symptoms, and
help control possibly fatal complications. The first step
in treatment for smokers is to quit, so as to prevent any
further deterioration of breathing ability. Smoking cessa-
tion programs may be effective. Consistent encourage-
ment along with the help of health care professionals as
well as family and friends can help increase the success
rate of someone attempting to quit.
If the patient and the health care team develop and
maintain a complete program of respiratory care, disabil-
ity can be decreased, acute episodes of illness may be
prevented, and the number of hospitalizations reduced.
However, only quitting smoking has been shown to slow
down the progression of the disease, and among all other
treatments, only oxygen therapy has shown an increase
in the survival rate.
Home oxygen therapy may improve the survival
times in those patients with advanced emphysema who
also have low blood oxygen levels. It may improve the
patient’s tolerance of exercise, as well as improve their
performance in certain aspects of brain function and
muscle coordination. The functioning of the heart may
also improve with an increased concentration of oxygen
in the blood. Oxygen may also decrease insomnia and
headaches. Some patients may only receive oxygen at
night, but studies have illustrated that it is most effective
when administered at least 18, but preferably 24 hours
per day. Portable oxygen tanks prescribed to patients
carry a limited supply and must be refilled on a regular
basis by a home health provider. Medicare and most
insurance companies cover a large proportion of the cost
of home oxygen therapy. Patients should be instructed
regarding special safety issues involving the transport
and presence of oxygen in the home.
A variety of medications may be used in the treat-
ment of emphysema. Usually the patient responds best to
a combination of medicines, rather than one single drug.
Bronchodilators are sometimes used to help alle-
viate the patient’s symptoms by relaxing and opening
the airways. They can be inhaled, taken by mouth, or
injected. Another category of medication often used is
corticosteroids or steroids. These help to decrease the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1173

None