A cerebral aneurysm can occur anywhere in the brain.
Aneurysms can have several shapes. The saccular
aneurysm, once called a berry aneurysm, resembles a piece
of fruit dangling from a branch. Saccular aneurysms are
usually found at a branch in the blood vessel where they
balloon out by a thin neck. Saccular cerebral aneurysms
most often occur at the branch points of large arteries at the
base of the brain. Aneurysms may also take the form of a
bulge in one wall of the artery—a lateral aneurysm—or a
widening of the entire artery—a fusiform aneurysm.
The greatest danger of aneurysms is rupture.
Approximately 50–75% of stricken people survive an
aneurysmal rupture. A ruptured aneurysm spills blood
into the brain or into the fluid-filled area that surrounds
the brain tissue. Bleeding into this area, called the sub-
arachnoid space, is referred to as subarachnoid hemor-
rhage (SAH). About 25,000 people suffer a SAH each
year. It is estimated that people with unruptured
aneurysm have an annual 1–2% risk of hemorrhage.
Under age 40, more men experience SAH. After age 40,
more women than men are affected.
Most people who have suffered a SAH from a rup-
tured aneurysm did not know that the aneurysm even
existed. Based on autopsy studies, medical researchers
estimate that 1–5% of the population has some type of
cerebral aneurysm. Aneurysms rarely occur in the very
young or the very old; about 60% of aneurysms are diag-
nosed in people between ages 40 and 65.
Some aneurysms may have a genetic link and run in
families. The genetic link has not been completely
proven and a pattern of inheritance has not been deter-
mined. Some studies seem to show that first-degree rela-
tives of people who suffered aneurysmal SAH are more
likely to have aneurysms themselves. These studies
reported that such immediate family members were four
times more likely to have aneurysms than the general
population. Other studies do not confirm these findings.
Better evidence links aneurysms to certain rare diseases
of the connective tissue. These diseases include Marfan
syndrome, pseudoxanthoma elasticum, Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome, and fibromuscular dysplasia. Polycystic kid-
ney disease is also associated with cerebral aneurysms.
These diseases are also associated with an increased
risk of aneurysmal rupture. Certain other conditions raise
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
697

None