When a man’s symptoms point to BPH, the first
thing the physician will want to do is a digital rectal
examination, inserting a finger into the anus to feel
whether—and how much—the prostate is enlarged. A
smooth prostate surface suggests BPH, whereas a dis-
tinct lump in the gland might mean prostate cancer.
The next step is a blood test for a substance called
prostate-specific antigen or PSA. Between 30–50% of
men with BPH have an elevated PSA level. This does
not mean cancer by any means, but other measures
are needed to make sure that the prostate enlargement
is in fact benign. An ultrasound exam of the prostate,
which is entirely safe and delivers no radiation, can
show whether it is enlarged and may show that cancer
is present.
If digital or ultrasound examination of the prostate
raises the suspicion of cancer, most urologists will rec-
ommend that a prostatic tissue biopsy be performed. This
is usually done using a lance-like instrument that is
inserted into the rectum. It pierces the rectal wall and,
guided by the physcian’s finger, obtains six to eight
pieces of prostatic tissue that are sent to the laboratory
for microscopic examination. If cancer is present, the
prognosis and treatment are changed accordingly.
A catheter placed through the urethra and into the
bladder can show how much urine remains in the bladder
after the patient urinates—a measure of how severe the
obstruction is. Another and very simple test for obstruc-
tion is to have the man urinate into a uroflowmeter,
which measures the rate of urine flow. A very certain—
though invasive—way of confirming obstruction from an
enlarged prostate is to pass a special viewing instrument
called a cystoscope into the bladder, but this is not often
necessary.
It is routine to check a urine sample for an increased
number of white blood cells, which may mean there is
infection of the bladder or kidneys. The same sample
may be cultured to show what type of bacterium is caus-
ing the infection, and which antibiotics will work best.

None