None

Several blood tests can be used to detect various
coagulation disorders. There are hundreds of different
tests a doctor can order to look for indications of specific
diseases. In addition to blood tests, physicians will com-
plete a medical history and physical examination. In the
case of acquired coagulation disorders, information such
as prior or current diseases and medications will be
important in determining the cause of the blood disorder.
• Hemohilia A will be diagnosed with laboratory tests
detecting presence of clotting factor VIII, factor IX, and
others, as well as the presence or absence of clotting
factor inhibitors.
• Christmas disease will be checked against normal
bleeding and clotting time, as well as for abnormal
serum reagents in factor IX deficiency. Other tests of
prothrombin time and thromboplastic generation may
also be ordered.
• There is no one test or group of tests that can always
make (or exclude) a diagnosis of DIC. DIC can be diag-
nosed through a number of laboratory tests which mea-
sure concentration of platelets and fibrinogen in the
blood with normal counts and prolonged prothrombin
time. Other supportive data include diminished levels
of factors V, fibrinogen, and VIII, decreased hemoglo-
bin, and others. Since many of the test results also indi-
cate other disorders, the physician may have to put
together several results to reach a diagnosis of DIC.
Serial tests may also be recommended, because a single
examine at one moment in time may not reveal the
process that is occurring.
• Tests for thrombocytopenia include coagulation tests
revealing a decreased platelet count, prolonged bleed-
ing time, and other measurements. If these tests indi-
cate that platelet destruction is causing the disorder, the
physician may order bone marrow examination.
• Von Willebrand’s disease will be diagnosed with the
assistance of laboratory tests which show prolonged
bleeding time, absent or reduced levels of factor VIII,
normal platelet count, and others.
• Hypothrombinemia is diagnosed with history informa-
tion and the use of tests that measure vitamin K defi-
ciency, deficiency of prothrombin, and clotting factors
V, VII, IX, and X.
• Factor XI deficiency is diagnosed most often after
injury-related bleeding. Blood tests can help pinpoint
factor VII deficiency.