Abscess—A walled-off pocket of pus caused by
infection.
Endoscope—A medical instrument that can be
passed into an area of the body (the bladder or
intestine, for example) to allow examination of
that area. The endoscope usually has a fiber-optic
camera that allows a greatly magnified image to
be shown on a television screen viewed by the
operator. Many endoscopes also allow the opera-
tor to retrieve a small sample (biopsy) of the area
being examined to more closely view the tissue
under a microscope.
Fistule—An abnormal channel that creates an
open passageway between two structures that do
not normally connect.
Gastrointestinal tract—The entire length of the
digestive system, running from the stomach,
through the small intestine, large intestine, and out
the rectum and anus.
Immune system—The body system responsible for
producing various cells and chemicals that fight
infection by viruses, bacteria, fungi, and other for-
eign invaders. In autoimmune disease, these cells
and chemicals turn against the body itself.
Inflammation—The result of the body’s attempts
to fight off and wall off an area that is infected.
Inflammation results in the classic signs of red-
ness, heat, swelling, and loss of function.
Obstruction—A blockage.
Ulceration—A pitted area or break in the continu-
ity of a surface such as skin or mucous membrane.
X rays can be helpful for diagnosis, and also for
determining how much of the intestine is involved in the
disease. For these x rays, the patient must either drink a
chalky solution containing barium, or receive a barium
enema (a solution that is administered through the rec-
tum). Barium helps to “light up” the intestine, allowing
more detail to be seen on the resulting x rays.
While Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis are sim-
ilar, they are also very different. Although it can be diffi-
cult to determine whether a patient has Crohn’s disease
or ulcerative colitis, it is important to make every effort
to distinguish between these two diseases. Because the
long-term complications of the diseases are different,
treatment will depend on careful diagnosis of the specific
IBD present.

None