None

As for genetic predisposition, on chromosome 5,
there is a gene called the APC gene associated with the
familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome. There are
multiple different mutations that occur at this site, yet
they all cause a defect in tumor suppression that results
in early and frequent development of colon cancer. This
genetic aberration is transmitted to 50% of offspring and
each of those affected will develop colon cancer, usually
at an early age. There is another syndrome, hereditary
non-polyposis colon cancer (also known as Lynch syn-
drome), related to mutations in any of four genes respon-
sible for DNA mismatch repair. In patients with colon
cancer, the p53 gene is mutated 70% of the time. When
the p53 gene is mutated and ineffective, cells with dam-
aged DNA escape repair or destruction. This allows for
the damaged cell to perpetuate itself, and continued
replication of the damaged DNA may lead to tumor
development. Though these syndromes have a very high
incidence of colon cancer, family history without the
syndrome is also a substantial risk factor. When consid-
ering first-degree relatives, history of one with colon can-
cer raises the baseline risk of 2% to 6%. (Most physi-
cians think that this baseline is about 4%.) The presence
of a second raises the risk to 17%.
The development of polyps of the colon almost
always precedes the development of colon cancer by five
or more years. Polyps are benign growths of the colon
lining. They can be unrelated to cancer, precancerous, or
malignant. Polyps, when identified, are removed for
diagnosis. If the polyps are benign, the patient should
undergo careful surveillance for the development of
more polyps or the development of colon cancer.
Colon cancer causes symptoms related to its local
presence in the large bowel or by its effect on other
organs if it has spread. These symptoms may occur alone
or in combination:
• a change in bowel habit
• blood in the stool
• bloating, persistent abdominal distention
• constipation
• a feeling of fullness even after having a bowel move-
ment
• narrowing of the stool—so-called ribbon stools
• persistent, chronic fatigue
• abdominal discomfort
• unexplained weight loss
• very rarely, nausea and vomiting
Most of these symptoms are caused by the physical
presence of the tumor mass in the colon. Similar symp-
toms can be caused by other processes; these are not
absolutely specific to colon cancer. The key is recogniz-
ing that the persistence of these types of symptoms with-
out ready explanation should prompt the individual to
seek medical evaluation.
Many of the symptoms are understood by remem-
bering that the colon is a tubular conduit. If a tumor
develops, as it reaches a certain size it will begin to cause
symptoms related to the obstruction of that conduit. In
addition, the tumor commonly oozes blood that is lost in
the stool. (Often, this blood is not visible.) This phenom-
enon results in anemia and chronic fatigue. Weight loss is
a late symptom, often implying substantial obstruction or
the presence of systemic disease.