None

Although much has been learned about human
embryology in the last couple of decades, a great deal
remains unknown. Studying prenatal human develop-
ment is difficult because the embryo and fetus develop in
a closed environment—the mother’s womb. However,
the relatively recent development of a number of prenatal
tests has opened a window on the process. Add to that
more accurate and complete evaluations of newborns,
especially those with problems, and a clearer picture of
what can go wrong before birth is possible.
The complicated process of brain development before
birth is susceptible to many chance errors that can result in
abnormalities of varying degrees. Some of these errors
will result in structural anomalies of the brain, while oth-
ers may cause undetectable, but significant, abnormalities
in how the cerebral cortex is “wired.” An abnormality in
structure or wiring is sometimes hereditary, but is most
often due to chance, or a cause unknown at this time.
Whether and how much genetics played a role in a particu-
lar brain abnormality depends to some degree on the type
of anomaly and the form of CP it causes.
Several maternal-fetal infections are known to
increase the risk for CP, including rubella (German
measles, now rare in the United States), cytomegalovirus
(CMV), and toxoplasmosis. Each of these infections is
considered a risk to the fetus only if the mother contracts
it for the first time during that pregnancy. Even in those
cases, though, most babies will be born normal. Most
women are immune to all three infections by the time
they reach childbearing age, but a woman’s immune sta-
tus can be determined using the so-called TORCH (for
Toxoplasmosis, Rubella, Cytomegalovirus, and Herpes)
test before or during pregnancy.
Just as a stroke can cause neurologic damage in an
adult, so too can this type of event occur in the fetus. A
burst blood vessel in the brain followed by uncontrolled
bleeding (coagulopathy), known as intracerebral hemor-
rhage, could cause a fetal stroke, or a cerebral blood ves-
sel could be obstructed by a clot (embolism). Infants who
later develop CP, along with their mothers, are more like-
ly than other mother-infant pairs to test positive for fac-
tors that put them at increased risk for bleeding episodes
or blood clots. Some coagulation disorders are strictly
hereditary, but most have a more complicated basis.
A teratogen is any substance to which a woman is
exposed that has the potential to harm the embryo or
fetus. Links between a drug or other chemical exposure
during pregnancy and a risk for CP are difficult to prove.
However, any substance that might affect fetal brain
development, directly or indirectly, could increase the
risk for CP. Furthermore, any substance that increases the
risk for premature delivery and low birth weight, such as
alcohol, tobacco, or cocaine, among others, might indi-
rectly increase the risk for CP.
The fetus receives all nutrients and oxygen from
blood that circulates through the placenta. Therefore,
anything that interferes with normal placental function
might adversely affect development of the fetus, includ-
ing the brain, or might increase the risk for premature
delivery. Structural abnormalities of the placenta, prema-
ture detachment of the placenta from the uterine wall
(abruption), and placental infections (chorioamnionitis)
are thought to pose some risk for CP.
Certain conditions in the mother during pregnancy
might pose a risk to fetal development leading to CP.
Women with autoimmune anti-thyroid or anti-phospho-
lipid (APA) antibodies are at slightly increased risk for
CP in their children. A potentially important clue uncov-
ered recently points toward high levels of cytokines in
the maternal and fetal circulation as a possible risk for
CP. Cytokines are proteins associated with inflammation,
such as from infection or autoimmune disorders, and
they may be toxic to neurons in the fetal brain. More
research is needed to determine the exact relationship, if
any, between high levels of cytokines in pregnancy and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
702