Before the EEG begins, a nurse or technician attach-
es approximately 16–20 electrodes to the patient’s scalp
with a conductive, washable paste. Depending on the
purpose for the EEG, implantable or invasive electrodes
are occasionally used. Implantable electrodes include
sphenoidal electrodes, which are fine wires inserted
under the zygomatic arch, or cheekbone; and depth elec-
trodes, which are surgically-implanted into the brain.
The EEG electrodes are painless, and are used to mea-
sure the electrical activity in various regions of the brain.
For the test, the patient lies on a bed, padded table,
or comfortable chair and is asked to relax and remain still
during the EEG testing period. An EEG usually takes no
more than one hour. During the test procedure, the
patient may be asked to breathe slowly or quickly; visual
stimuli such as flashing lights or a patterned board may
be used to stimulate certain types of brain activity.
Throughout the procedure, the electroencephalograph
machine makes a continuous graphic record of the
patient’s brain activity, or brainwaves, on a long strip of
recording paper or on a computer screen. This graphic
record is called an electroencephalogram.
The sleep EEG uses the same equipment and proce-
dures as a regular EEG. Patients undergoing a sleep EEG
are encouraged to fall asleep completely rather than just
relax. They are typically provided a bed and a quiet room
conducive to sleep. A sleep EEG lasts up to three hours.
In an ambulatory EEG, patients are hooked up to a
portable cassette recorder. They then go about their nor-
mal activities, and take their normal rest and sleep for a
period of up to 24 hours. During this period, the patient
and patient’s family record any symptoms or abnormal
behaviors, which can later be correlated with the EEG to
see if they represent seizures.
Many insurance plans provide reimbursement for
EEG testing. Costs for an EEG range from $100 to more
than $500, depending on the purpose and type of test
(i.e., asleep or awake, and invasive or non-invasive elec-
trodes). Because coverage may be dependent on the dis-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1151

None