None

cannot pass out of the gallbladder in the normal way.
Back pressure on the gallbladder, chemical changes from
the stagnating bile trapped within the gallbladder, and
occasionally bacterial infection, result in damage to the
gallbladder wall. As the gallbladder becomes swollen,
some areas of the wall do not receive adequate blood
flow, and lack of oxygen causes cells to die.
When the stone blocks the flow of bile from the liver,
certain normal byproducts of the liver’s processing of red
blood cells (called bilirubin) build up. The bilirubin is
reabsorbed into the bloodstream, and over time this biliru-
bin is deposited in the skin and in the whites of the eyes.
Because bilirubin contains a yellowish color, it causes a
yellowish cast to the skin and eyes that is called jaundice.
Gallstone formation is seen in twice as many women
as men, particularly those between the ages of 20 and 60.
Pregnant women, or those on birth control pills or estro-
gen replacement therapy have a greater risk of gallstones,
as do Native Americans and Mexican Americans. People
who are overweight, or who lose a large amount of
weight quickly are also at greater risk for developing
gallstones. Not all individuals with gallstones will go on
to have cholecystitis, since many people never have any
symptoms from their gallstones and never know they
exist. However, the vast majority of people with chole-
cystitis will be found to have gallstones. Rare causes of
cholecystitis include severe burns or injury, massive sys-
temic infection, severe illness, diabetes, obstruction by a
tumor of the duct leaving the gallbladder, and certain
uncommon infections of the gallbladder (including bac-
teria and worms).
Although there are rare reports of patients with
chronic cholecystitis who never experience any pain,
nearly 100% of the time cholecystitis will be diagnosed
after a patient has experienced a bout of severe pain in
the region of the gallbladder and liver. The pain may be
crampy and episodic, or it may be constant. The pain is
often described as pushing through to the right upper
back and shoulder. Because deep breathing increases the
pain, breathing becomes shallow. Fever is often present,
and nausea and vomiting are nearly universal. Jaundice
occurs when the duct leaving the liver is also obstructed,
although it may take a number of days for it to become
apparent. When bacterial infection sets in, the patient
may begin to experience higher fever and shaking chills.