None

Enzymes play an important role in breaking down
carbohydrates into forms that can pass through the intes-
tine and be used by the body. Usually they are named by
adding ase to the name of the substance they act on, so
lactase is the enzyme needed to process lactose. Cooked
starch is broken down in the mouth to a disaccharide by
amylase, an enzyme in the saliva. The disaccharides mal-
tose, sucrose, and lactose cannot be absorbed until they
have been separated into simple sugar molecules by their
corresponding enzymes present in the cells lining the
intestinal tract. If this process is not completed, digestion
is interrupted.
Although not common, a deficiency in the enzymes
needed to digest lactose, maltose, and sucrose is some-
times present at birth. Intestinal lactase enzymes usually
decrease naturally with age, but this happens to varying
degrees. Because of the uneven distribution of enzyme
deficiency based on race and ethnic heritage, especially
in lactose intolerance, genetics are believed to play a role
in the cause of primary carbohydrate intolerance.
Digestive diseases such as celiac disease and tropi-
cal sprue (which affect absorption in the intestine), as
well as intestinal infections and injuries, can reduce the
amount of enzymes produced. In cancer patients, treat-
ment with radiation therapy or chemotherapy may
affect the cells in the intestine that normally secrete lac-
tase, leading to intolerance.
The severity of the symptoms depends on the extent
of the enzyme deficiency, and range from a feeling of
mild bloating to severe diarrhea. In the case of a lactase
deficiency, undigested milk sugar remains in the intes-
tine, which is then fermented by the bacteria normally
present in the intestine. These bacteria produce gas,
cramping, bloating, a “gurgly” feeling in the abdomen,
and flatulence. In a growing child, the main symptoms
are diarrhea and a failure to gain weight. In an individual
with lactase deficiency, gastrointestinal distress begins
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
649