None

Fever is a natural response of the body that helps in
fighting off foreign substances, such as microorganisms,
toxins, etc. Body temperature is set by the thermoregula-
tory center, located in an area in the brain called hypo-
thalamus. Body temperature is not constant all day, but
actually is lowest at 6 A.M. and highest around 4–6 P.M. In
addition, temperature varies in different regions of the
body; for example, rectal and urine temperatures are
about one degree Fahrenheit higher than oral temperature
and rectal temperature is higher than urine. It is also
important to realize that certain normal conditions can
effect body temperature, such as pregnancy, food inges-
tion, age, and certain hormonal changes.
Substances that cause fever are known as “pyro-
gens.” There are two types of pyrogens; exogenous and
endogenous. Those that originate outside the body, such
as bacterial toxins, are called “exogenous” pyrogens.
Pyrogens formed by the body’s own cells in response to
an outside stimulus (such as a bacterial toxin) are called
“endogenous” pyrogens.
Researchers have discovered that there are several
“endogenous” pyrogens. These are made up of small
groups of amino acids, the building blocks of proteins.
These natural pyrogens have other functions in addition
to inducing fever; they have been named “cytokines”.
When cytokines are injected into humans, fever and
chills develop within an hour. Interferon, tumor necrosis
factor, and various interleukins are the major fever pro-
ducing cytokines.
The production of fever is a very complex process;
somehow, these cytokines cause the thermoregulatory
center in the hypothalamus to reset the normal tempera-
ture level. The body’s initial response is to conserve heat
by vasoconstriction, a process in which blood vessels nar-
row and prevent heat loss from the skin and elsewhere.
This alone will raise temperature by two to three degrees.
Certain behavioral activities also occur, such as adding
more clothes, seeking a warmer environment, etc. If the
hypothalamus requires more heat, then shivering occurs.
Fever is a body defense mechanism. It has been
shown that one of the effects of temperature increase is to
slow bacterial growth. However, fever also has some
downsides; the body’s metabolic rate is increased and
with it, oxygen consumption. This can have a devastating
effect on those with poor circulation. In addition, fever
can lead to seizures in the very young.
When temperature elevation occurs for an extended
period of time and no cause is found, the term FUO is
then used. The far majority of these patients are eventual-
ly found to have one of several diseases.