None

Diagnosis begins with a visit to the physician, who
will take a medical history, discuss symptoms, listen to
the heart, and perform basic screening tests. These tests
will measure weight, blood pressure, blood lipid levels,
and fasting blood glucose levels. Other diagnostic tests
include resting and exercise electrocardiogram, echocar-
diography, radionuclide scans, and coronary angiogra-
phy. The treadmill exercise (stress) test is an appropriate
screening test for those with high risk factors even when
they feel well.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows the heart’s
activity and may reveal a lack of oxygen (ischemia).
Electrodes covered with conducting jelly are placed on
the patient’s chest, arms, and legs. They send impulses of
the heart’s activity through an oscilloscope (a monitor) to
a recorder that traces them on paper. The test takes about
10 minutes and is performed in a physician’s office. A
definite diagnosis cannot be made from electrocardiog-
raphy. About 50% of patients with significant coronary
artery disease have normal resting electrocardiograms.
Another type of electrocardiogram, known as the exer-
cise stress test, measures how the heart and blood ves-
sels respond to exertion when the patient is exercising on
a treadmill or a stationary bike. This test is performed in
a physician’s office or an exercise laboratory. It takes
15–30 minutes. It is not perfectly accurate. It sometimes
gives a normal reading when the patient has a heart prob-
lem or an abnormal reading when the patient does not.
If the electrocardiogram reveals a problem or is
inconclusive, the next step is exercise echocardiography
or nuclear scanning (angiography). Echocardiography,
cardiac ultrasound, uses sound waves to create an image
of the heart’s chambers and valves. A technician applies
gel to a hand-held transducer, then presses it against the
patient’s chest. The heart’s sound waves are converted
into an image that can be displayed on a monitor. It does
not reveal the coronary arteries themselves, but can
detect abnormalities in heart wall motion caused by coro-
nary disease. Performed in a cardiology outpatient diag-
nostic laboratory, the test takes 30–60 minutes.
Radionuclide angiography enables physicians to see
the blood flow of the coronary arteries. Nuclear scans are
performed by injecting a small amount of radiopharma-
ceutical such as thallium into the bloodstream. A device
that uses gamma rays to produce an image of the radioac-
tive material (gamma camera) records pictures of the
heart. Radionuclide scans are not dangerous. The radia-
tion exposure is about the same as that in a chest x ray.
The tiny amount of radioactive material used disappears
from the body in a few days. Radionuclide scans cost
about four times as much as exercise stress tests but pro-
vide more information.
In radionuclide angiography, a scanning camera
passes back and forth over the patient who lies on a table.
Radionuclide angiography is usually performed in a hos-
pital’s nuclear medicine department and takes 30–60
minutes. Thallium scanning is usually done in conjunc-
tion with an exercise stress test. When the stress test is
finished, thallium or sestamibi is injected. The patient
resumes exercise for one minute to absorb the thallium.
For patients who cannot exercise, cardiac blood flow and
heart rate may be increased by intravenous dipyridamole
(Persantine) or adenosine. Thallium scanning is done
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
930