None

However, the wide variance in the distribution of
esophageal cancer among different demographic groups
raises the possibility that genetic factors also play a role.
Several risk factors are associated with esophageal
cancer.
• Tobacco and alcohol consumption are the major risk
factors, especially for squamous cell carcinoma. Smok-
ing and alcohol abuse each increase the risk of squa-
mous cell carcinoma by five-fold. The effects of the
two are synergistic, in that the combination of smoking
and alchohol increases the risk by 25- to 100- fold. It is
estimated that drinking about 13 ounces of alcohol
every day for an extended period of time raises the risk
of developing esophageal cancer by 18%. That likeli-
hood increases to 44% in individuals who also smoke
one or two packs of cigarettes a day. Smokeless tobacco
also increases the risk for esophageal cancer.
• Gastroesophageal reflux is a condition in which acid
from the stomach refluxes backwards into the lower
portion of the esophagus, sometimes causing symptoms
of heartburn. In some cases of gastroesophageal
reflux, the chronic exposure to acid causes the inner lin-
ing of the lower esophagus to change from squamous
cells to glandular cells. This is called Barrett’s esopha-
gus. Patients with Barrett’s esophagus are roughly 30 to
40 times more likely than the general population to
develop adenocarcinoma of the esophagus.
• A diet low in fruits, vegetables, zinc, riboflavin, and
other vitamins can increase risk of developing to
esophageal cancer.
• Caustic injury to the esophagus inflicted by swallowing
lye or other substances that damage esophageal cells can
lead to the development of squamous cell esophageal
cancer in later life.
• Achalasia is a condition in which the lower esophageal
sphincter (muscle) cannot relax enough to let food pass
into the stomach. Squamous cell esophageal cancer
develops in about 6% of patients with achalasia.
• Tylosis is a rare inherited disease characterized by
excess skin on the palms and soles. Affected patients
have a much higher probability of developing
esophageal cancer than the general population. They
should have regular screenings to detect the disease in
its early, most curable stages.
• Esophageal webs, which are protrusions of tissue into
the esophagus, and diverticula, which are outpouchings
of the wall of the esophagus, are associated with a high-
er incidence of esophageal cancer.