The cause of Crohn’s disease is unknown. No infec-
tious agent (virus, bacteria, or fungi) has been identified
as the cause of Crohn’s disease. Still, some researchers
have theorized that some type of infection may have
originally been responsible for triggering the immune
system, resulting in the continuing and out-of-control
cycle of inflammation that occurs in Crohn’s disease.
Other evidence for a disorder of the immune system
includes the high incidence of other immune disorders
that may occur along with Crohn’s disease.
The first symptoms of Crohn’s disease include diar-
rhea, fever, abdominal pain, inability to eat, weight loss,
and fatigue. Some patients have severe pain that mimics
appendicitis. It is rare, however, for patients to notice
blood in their bowel movements. Because Crohn’s disease
severely limits the ability of the affected intestine to absorb
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
956
Crohn’s disease
the nutrients from food, a patient with Crohn’s disease can
have signs of malnutrition, depending on the amount of
intestine affected and the duration of the disease.
The combination of severe inflammation, ulceration,
and scarring that occurs in Crohn’s disease can result in
serious complications, including obstruction, abscess
formation, and fistula formation.
An obstruction is a blockage in the intestine. This
obstruction prevents the intestinal contents from passing
beyond the point of the blockage. The intestinal contents
“back up,” resulting in constipation, vomiting, and
intense pain. Although rare in Crohn’s disease (because
of the increased thickness of the intestinal wall due to
swelling and scarring), a severe bowel obstruction can
result in an intestinal wall perforation (a hole in the intes-
tine). Such a hole in the intestinal wall would allow the
intestinal contents, usually containing bacteria, to enter
the abdomen. This complication could result in a severe,
life-threatening infection.
Abcess formation is the development of a walled-off
pocket of infection. A patient with an abscess will have
bouts of fever, increased abdominal pain, and may have a
lump or mass that can be felt through the wall of the
abdomen.
Fistula formation is the formation of abnormal chan-
nels. These channels may connect one area of the intes-
tine to another neighboring section of intestine. Fistuals
may join an area of the intestine to the vagina or bladder,
or they may drain an area of the intestine through the
skin. Abscesses and fistulas commonly affect the area
around the anus and rectum (the very last portions of the
colon allowing waste to leave the body). These abnormal
connections allow the bacteria that normally live in the
intestine to enter other areas of the body, causing poten-
tially serious infections.
Patients suffering from Crohn’s disease also have a
significant chance of experiencing other disorders. Some
of these may relate specifically to the intestinal disease,
and others appear to have some relationship to the imbal-
anced immune system. The faulty absorption state of the
bowel can result in gallstones and kidney stones.
Inflamed areas in the abdomen may press on the tube that
drains urine from the kidney to the bladder (the ureter).
Ureter compression can make urine back up into the kid-
ney, enlarge the ureter and kidney, and can potentially
lead to kidney damage. Patients with Crohn’s disease
also frequently suffer from:
• arthritis (inflammation of the joints)
• spondylitis (inflammation of the vertebrae, the bones of
the spine)
• ulcers of the mouth and skin
• painful, red bumps on the skin
• inflammation of several eye areas
• inflammation of the liver, gallbladder, and/or the chan-
nels (ducts) that carry bile between and within the liver,
gallbladder, and intestine
The chance of developing cancer of the intestine is
greater than normal among patients with Crohn’s dis-
ease, although this chance is not as high as among those
patients with ulcerative colitis

None