Red blood cells carry several types of proteins,
called antigens, on their surfaces. The A, B, and O anti-
gens are used to classify a person’s blood as type A, B,
AB, or O. Each parent passes one A, B, or O antigen
gene to their child. How the genes are paired determines
the person’s blood type.
A person who inherits an A antigen gene from each
parent has type A blood; receiving two B antigen genes
corresponds with type B blood; and inheriting A and B
antigen genes means a person has type AB blood. If the
O antigen gene is inherited from both parents, the child
has type O blood; however, the pairing of A and O anti-
gen genes corresponds with type A blood; and if the B
antigen gene is matched with the O antigen gene, the per-
son has type B blood.
Another red blood cell antigen, called the Rh factor,
also plays a role in describing a person’s blood type. A
person with at least one copy of the gene for the Rh fac-
tor has Rh-positive blood; if no copies are inherited, the
person’s blood type is Rh-negative. In blood typing, the
presence of A, B, and O antigens, plus the presence or
absence of the Rh-factor, determine a person’s specific
blood type, such as A-positive, B-negative, and so on.
A person’s blood type has no effect on health. How-
ever, an individual’s immune system considers only that
person’s specific blood type, or a close match, accept-
able. If a radically different blood type is introduced into
the bloodstream, the immune system produces antibod-
ies, proteins that specifically attack and destroy any cell
carrying the foreign antigen.
Determining a person’s blood type is very important
if she becomes pregnant. Blood cells from the unborn
baby (fetal red blood cells) can cross over into the moth-
er’s bloodstream, especially at delivery. If the mother and
her baby have compatible blood types, the crossover
does not present any danger. However, if the blood types
are incompatible, the mother’s immune system manufac-
tures antibodies against the baby’s blood.
Usually, this incompatibility is not a factor in a first
pregnancy, because few fetal blood cells reach the
mother’s bloodstream until delivery. The antibodies that
form after delivery cannot affect the first child. In later
pregnancies, fetuses and babies may be in grave danger.
The danger arises from the possibility that the mother’s
antibodies will attack the fetal red blood cells. If this
happens, the fetus or baby can suffer severe health effects
and may die.

None