• Behavioral homework assignments. Cognitive-behav-
ioral therapists frequently request that their patients
complete homework assignments between therapy ses-
sions. These may consist of real-life “behavioral exper-
iments” where patients are encouraged to try out new
responses to situations discussed in therapy sessions.
• Cognitive rehearsal. The patient imagines a difficult sit-
uation and the therapist guides him through the step-by-
step process of facing and successfully dealing with it.
The patient then works on practicing, or rehearsing,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
840
Cognitive-behavioral therapy
these steps mentally. Ideally, when the situation arises
in real life, the patient will draw on the rehearsed
behavior to address it.
• Journal. Patients are asked to keep a detailed diary
recounting their thoughts, feelings, and actions when
specific situations arise. The journal helps to make the
patient aware of his or her maladaptive thoughts and to
show their consequences on behavior. In later stages of
therapy, it may serve to demonstrate and reinforce posi-
tive behaviors.
• Modeling. The therapist and patient engage in role-
playing exercises in which the therapist acts out appro-
priate behaviors or responses to situations.
• Conditioning. The therapist uses reinforcement to
encourage a particular behavior. For example, a child
with ADHD gets a gold star every time he stays focused
on tasks and accomplishes certain daily chores. The
gold star reinforces and increases the desired behavior
by identifying it with something positive. Reinforce-
ment can also be used to extinguish unwanted behav-
iors by imposing negative consequences.
• Systematic desensitization. Patients imagine a situation
they fear, while the therapist employs techniques to help
the patient relax, helping the person cope with their fear
reaction and eventually eliminate the anxiety altogether.
For example, a patient in treatment for agoraphobia, or
fear of open or public places, will relax and then picture
herself on the sidewalk outside of her house. In her next
session, she may relax herself and then imagine a visit to
a crowded shopping mall. The imagery of the anxiety-
producing situations gets progressively more intense
until, eventually, the therapist and patient approach the
anxiety-causing situation in real-life (a “graded expo-
sure”), perhaps by visiting a mall. Exposure may be
increased to the point of “flooding,” providing maximum
exposure to the real situation. By repeatedly pairing a
desired response (relaxation) with a fear-producing situa-
tion (open, public spaces), the patient gradually becomes
desensitized to the old response of fear and learns to
react with feelings of relaxation.
• Validity testing. Patients are asked to test the validity of
the automatic thoughts and schemas they encounter.
The therapist may ask the patient to defend or produce
evidence that a schema is true. If the patient is unable to
meet the challenge, the faulty nature of the schema is
exposed.
Initial treatment sessions are typically spent explain-
ing the basic tenets of cognitive-behavioral therapy to the
patient and establishing a positive working relationship
between therapist and patient. Cognitive-behavioral thera-
py is a collaborative, action-oriented therapy effort. As
such, it empowers the patient by giving him an active role

None