Positively charged electrolytes
High serum sodium levels (hypernatremia) occur at
sodium concentrations over 145 mM, with severe hyper-
natremia over 152 mM. Hypernatremia is usually caused
by diseases that cause excessive urination. In these cases,
water is lost, but sodium is still retained in the body. The
symptoms include confusion and can lead to convulsions
and coma. Low serum sodium levels (hyponatremia) are
below 130 mM, with severe hyponatremia at or below 125
mM. Hyponatremia often occurs with severe diarrhea,
with losses of both water and sodium, but with sodium
loss exceeding water loss. Hyponatremia provokes clinical
problems only if serum sodium falls below 125 mM, espe-
cially if this has occurred rapidly. The symptoms can be as
mild as tiredness but may lead to convulsions and coma.
High serum potassium (hyperkalemia) occurs at
potassium levels above 5.0 mM; it is considered severe
over 8.0 mM. Hyperkalemia is relatively uncommon, but
sometimes occurs in patients with kidney failure who take
potassium supplements. Hyperkalemia can result in abnor-
mal beating of the heart (cardiac arrhythmias). Low
serum potassium (hypokalemia) occurs when serum
potassium falls below 3.0 mM. It can result from low
dietary potassium, as during starvation or in patients with
anorexia nervosa; from excessive losses via the kidneys,
as caused by diuretic drugs; or by diseases of the adrenal
or pituitary glands. Mild hypokalemia causes muscle
weakness, while severe hypokalemia can cause paralysis,
the inability to breathe, and cardiac arrhythmias.
High levels of calcium ions (hypercalcemia) occur
at free calcium ion concentrations over 5.2 mg/dL or
total serum calcium above 10.4 mg/dL. Hypercalcemia
usually occurs when the body dissolves bone at an abnor-
mally fast rate, increasing both serum calcium and serum
phosphate. Sudden hypercalcemia can cause vomiting
and coma, while prolonged and moderate hypercalcemia
results in the deposit of calcium phosphate crystals in the
kidneys and eye. Hypocalcemia occurs when serum free
calcium ions fall below 4.4 mg/dL, or when total serum
calcium falls below 8.8 mg/dL. Hypocalcemia can result
from hypoparathyroidism (low parathyroid hormone),
from failure to produce 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, from
low levels of plasma magnesium, and from phosphate
poisoning (the phosphate enters the bloodstream and
forms a complex with the free serum calcium). Hypocal-
cemia can cause depression and muscle spasms.
Hypermagnesemia occurs at serum magnesium lev-
els over 25 mM (60 mg/dL). Hypermagnesemia is rare
but can occur with the excessive consumption of magne-
sium salts. Hypomagnesemia occurs when serum magne-
sium levels fall below 0.8 mM, and can result from poor
nutrition. Chronic alcoholism is the most common
cause of hypomagnesemia, in part because of poor diet.
Magnesium levels below 0.5 mM (1.2 mg/dL) cause
serum calcium levels to decline. Some of the symptoms
of hypomagnesemia, including twitching and convul-
sions, actually result from the concurrent hypocalcemia.
Hypomagnesemia can also result in hypokalemia and
thereby cause cardiac arrhythmias.

None