None

and close to allow the blood to flow in only one direction
through the heart during each contraction.
For the heart to pump blood efficiently, the four
chambers must contract and relax, and the four valves
must open and close, in a well coordinated fashion. By
damaging the valves or the walls of the heart chambers,
endocarditis can interfere with the ability of the heart to
do its job.
Endocarditis rarely occurs in people with healthy,
normal hearts. Rather, it most commonly occurs when
there is damage to the endocardium. The endocardium
may be affected by a congenital heart defect, such as
mitral valve prolapse, in which blood leaks through a
poorly functioning mitral valve back into the heart. It
may also be damaged by a prior scarring of the heart
muscle, such as rheumatic fever, or replacement of a
heart valve. Any of these conditions can damage the
endocardium and make it more susceptible to infection.
Bacteria can get into the blood stream (a condition
known as bacteremia) in a number of different ways: It
may spread from a localized infection such as a urinary
tract infection, pneumonia, or skin infection or get into
the blood stream as a result of certain medical condi-
tions, such as severe periodontal disease, colon cancer,
or inflammatory bowel disease. It can enter the blood
stream during minor procedures, such as periodontal
surgery, tooth extractions, teeth cleaning, tonsil removal,
prostate removal, or endoscopic examination. It can also
be introduced through in-dwelling catheters, which are
used for intravenous medications, intravenous feeding, or
dialysis. In people who use intravenous drugs, the bacte-
ria can enter the blood stream through unsterilized, cont-
aminated needles and syringes. (People who are prone to
endocarditis generally need to take prescribed antibi-
otics before certain surgical or dental procedures to help
prevent this infection.)
If not discovered and treated, infective endocarditis
can permanently damage the heart muscle, especially the
valves. For the heart to work properly, all four valves
must be functioning well, opening at the right time to let
blood flow in the right direction and closing at the right
time to keep the blood from flowing in the wrong direc-
tion. If the valve is damaged, this may allow blood to flow
backward—a condition known as regurgitation. As a
result of a poorly functioning valve, the heart muscle has
to work harder to pump blood and may become weak-
ened, leading to heart failure. Heart failure is a chronic
condition in which the heart is unable to pump blood well
enough to supply blood adequately to the body.
Another danger associated with endocarditis is that
the vegetation formed by bacteria colonizing on heart
valves may break off, forming emboli. These emboli
may travel through the circulation and become lodged in
blood vessels. By blocking the flow of blood, emboli
can starve various tissues of nutrients and oxygen, dam-
aging them. For instance, an embolus lodged in the
blood vessels of the lungs may cause pneumonia-like
symptoms. An embolus may also affect the brain, dam-
aging nerve tissue, or the kidneys, causing kidney dis-
ease. Emboli may also weaken the tiny blood vessels
called capillaries, causing hemorrhages (leaking blood
vessels) throughout the body.