None

The heart rate of a fetus undergoes constant adjust-
ment as it responds to its environment and other stimuli.
The fetal monitor records an unborn baby’s heart rate and
graphs it on a piece of paper. Electronic fetal monitoring
is usually advised for high-risk pregnancies, when the
baby is in danger of distress. Specific reasons for EFM
include: babies in a breech position, premature labor,
and induced labor, among others.
When electronic fetal monitoring was originally
introduced in the 1960s and 1970s, the hope was that it
would help physicians diagnose fetal hypoxia, or lack of
oxygen, in time to prevent damage to the baby. This lack
of oxygen, also known as perinatal asphyxia or birth
asphyxia, is an important cause of stillbirth and newborn
deaths. It occurs when there are less than normal
amounts of oxygen delivered to the body or an organ and
there is build-up of carbon dioxide in the body or tissue.
A lack of blood flow to an organ can cause asphyxia.
Perinatal asphyxia can occur a long time before birth,
shortly before birth, during delivery, or after birth. If the
interruption to the supply of oxygen is short, the baby
may recover without any damage. If the time is longer,
there may be some injury that is reversible. If the time
period without oxygen is very long, there may be perma-
nent injury to one or more organs of the body. It is impor-
tant, to detect any signs of asphyxia as soon as possible.
One of the signs is an abnormal heart rate and rhythm in
the unborn baby, which can be detected by electronic
fetal monitoring.
The fetal monitor is a more intricate version of the
machine that a health care provider uses to listen to a baby’s
heartbeat. The monitor that is used during prenatal visits just
picks up the sound of the baby’s heart beating. The fetal
monitor also keeps a continuous paper record of the heart
rate. In addition, the fetal monitor can record uterine con-
tractions on the lower part of the paper strip. This helps the
doctor or midwife determine how a baby is handling the
stress of contractions. The normal pattern is for the baby’s
heartbeat to drop slightly during a contraction and then go
back to normal after the contraction is over. EFM looks for
any changes from this normal pattern, particularly if there is
a drastic drop in the baby’s heart beat or if the heart rate
does not recover immediately after a contraction.
Because it is an indirect test, it is not perfect. When
an adult complains to a provider about not feeling well,
checking the heart rate is only one of many things that
the doctor will do. With an unborn baby, however, check-
ing the heart rate is basically the only thing that a doctor
or midwife can do.
Fetal monitoring can be helpful in a variety of differ-
ent situations. During pregnancy, fetal monitoring can be
used as a part of antepartum testing. If the practitioner
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1161