None

Abscess—An area of inflamed and injured body
tissue that fills with pus.
Decortication—Surgical removal of the fibrous
peel that covers the lungs in third-stage empyema.
Empyema—The collection of pus in a body cavity,
particularly the lung or pleural cavity.
Fibrin—A fibrous blood protein vital to coagula-
tion and blood clot formation.
Percussion—A diagnostic technique in which the
back, chest, or abdomen is tapped to determine
whether body cavities contain abnormal fluid.
Pleural cavity—The space surrounding the lungs,
including the membranes covering the lungs and
lining the inside of the chest wall.
Pneumonia—Inflammation of the lungs usually
caused by a virus, bacteria, or other organism.
Resection—The surgical removal of part of an
organ or body structure, as in rib resection.
Suppurate—To produce or discharge pus.
Thoracentesis—A procedure in which fluid is
withdrawn from the pleural cavity through a nee-
dle inserted between the ribs. The fluid may be
withdrawn either for diagnostic tests or to drain
the cavity.
Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS)—A tech-
nique used to aid in the placement of chest tubes
or when performing decortications when treating
advanced empyema.
prefer to lie on the side of the body affected by the
empyema. Family members may notice bad breath. In
severe cases, the patient may become dehydrated, cough
up blood or greenish-brown sputum, run a fever as high
as 105°F (40.6°C), or fall into a coma.
Patients with thoracic empyema may develop poten-
tially life-threatening complications if the condition is
not treated. The infected tissues may develop large col-
lections of pus (abscesses) that can rupture into the
patient’s airway, or the infection may spread to the tis-
sues surrounding the heart. In extreme cases the empye-
ma may spread to the brain by means of bacteria carried
in the bloodstream.
In pelvic empyema, the infection produces large
amounts of thick, foul-smelling pus that is rapidly
replaced even after drainage. Empyema of the gallblad-
der is marked by intense pain on the upper right side of
the abdomen, high fever, and rigidity of the muscles over
the infected area.