None

CPR in basic life support. Figure A:The victim should be flat on his back and his mouth should be checked for debris. Figure
B: If the victim is unconscious, open airway, lift neck, and tilt head back. Figure C: If victim is not breathing, begin artificial
breathing with four quick full breaths. Figure D: Check for carotid pulse. Figure E: If pulse is absent, begin artificial circula-
tion by depressing sternum. Figure F: Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation of an infant. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
son begins breathing without assistance. If the uncon-
scious person is breathing, the rescuer turns the person
onto his or her side.
• If there is no heartbeat, the rescuer performs chest com-
pressions. The rescuer kneels next to the unconscious
person, placing the heel of one hand in the spot on the
lower chest where the two halves of the rib cage come
together. The rescuer puts one hand on top of the other
on the person’s chest and interlocks the fingers. The
arms are straightened, the rescuer’s shoulders are posi-
tioned directly above the hands on the unconscious per-
son’s chest. The hands are pressed down, using only the
palms, so that the person’s breastbone sinks in about
1.5–2 inches. The rescuer releases pressure without
removing the hands, then repeats about 15 times per
10–15 second intervals.
• The rescuer tilts the unconscious person’s head and
returns to rescue breathing for one or two quick breaths.
Then breathing and chest compressions are alternated
for one minute before checking for a pulse. If the res-
cuer finds signs of a heartbeat and breathing, CPR is
stopped. If the unconscious person is breathing but has
no pulse, the chest compressions are continued. If the
unconscious person has a pulse but is not breathing,
rescue breathing is continued.
• For children over the age of eight, the rescuer performs
CPR exactly as for an adult.
PERFORMING CPR ON AN INFANT OR CHILD UNDER
THE AGE OF EIGHT. The procedures outlined above are
followed with these differences:
• The rescuer administers CPR for one minute, then calls
for help.
• The rescuer makes a seal around the child’s mouth or
infant’s nose and mouth to give gentle breaths. The res-
cuer delivers 20 rescue breaths per minute, taking 1.5–2
seconds for each breath.
• Chest compressions are given with only one hand for a
child and with two or three fingers for an infant. The
breastbone is depressed only 1–1.5 in (2.5–3.8 cm) for
a child and 0.5–1 in (1.3–2.5 cm) for an infant, and the
rescuer gives at least 100 chest compressions per
minute.