Acetaminophen—A drug for relieving pain and
fever. Tylenol is the most common example.
Acyclovir—An antiviral drug used for combating
chickenpox and other herpes viruses. Sold under
the name Zovirax.
Dehydration—Excessive water loss by the body.
Encephalitis—A disease that inflames the brain.
Hepatitis—A disease that inflames the liver.
Immune system—A biochemical complex that pro-
tects the body against pathogenic organisms and
other foreign bodies.
Immunocompromised—Having a damaged immune
system.
Pneumonia—A disease that inflames the lungs.
Pus—A thick yellowish or greenish fluid containing
inflammatory cells. Usually caused by bacterial
infection.
Reye’s syndrome—A rare but often fatal disease that
involves the brain, liver, and kidneys.
Salicylates—Substances containing salicylic acid,
which are used for relieving pain and fever. Aspirin
is the most common example.
Shingles—A disease (also called herpes zoster) that
causes a rash and a very painful nerve inflamma-
tion. An attack of chickenpox will eventually give
rise to shingles in about 20% of the population.
Trunk—That part of the body that does not include
the head, arms, and legs.
Varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG)—A sub-
stance that can reduce the severity of chickenpox
symptoms.
Varicella-zoster virus—The virus that causes chick-
enpox and shingles.
Varivax—A vaccine for the prevention of chicken-
pox.
Virus—A tiny particle that can cause infections by
duplicating itself inside a cell using the cell’s own
software. Antibiotics are ineffective against viruses,
though antiviral drugs exist for some viruses,
including chickenpox.
receive their measles-mumps-rubella vaccine. For older
children, up to age 12, the CDC recommends vaccina-
tion when a reliable determination that the child in
question has already had chickenpox cannot be made.
Vaccination is also recommended for any older child or
adult considered susceptible to the disease, particularly
those, such as health care workers and women of child-
bearing age, who face a greater likelihood of severe ill-
ness or transmitting infection. A single dose of the vac-
cine is sufficient for children up to age 12; older chil-
dren and adults receive a second dose four to eight
weeks later. In 1997 the cost of two adult doses of the
vaccine in the United States was about $80. Although
this cost was not always covered by health insurance
plans, children up to age 18 without access to the
appropriate coverage could be vaccinated free of charge
through the federal Vaccines for Children program.
Varivax is not given to patients who already have overt
signs of the disease. The vaccine is also not recom-
mended for those women who are pregnant, or they
should delay pregnancy for three months following a
complete vaccination. The vaccine is useful when given
early after exposure to chickenpox and, if given in the
midst of the incubation period, it can be preventative.
The Infectious Diseases Society of America stated in
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
752

None