None

Asphyxia—Lack of oxygen. In the case of cerebral
palsy, lack of oxygen to the brain.
Ataxia—A deficiency of muscular coordination,
especially when voluntary movements are attempt-
ed, such as grasping or walking.
Athetosis—A condition marked by slow, writhing,
involuntary muscle movements.
Cerebral palsy—Movement disability resulting from
nonprogressive brain damage.
Coagulopathy—A disorder in which blood is either
too slow or too quick to coagulate (clot).
Contracture—A tightening of muscles that prevents
normal movement of the associated limb or other
body part.
Cytokine—A protein associated with inflammation
that, at high levels, may be toxic to nerve cells in
the developing brain.
Diplegia—Paralysis affecting like parts on both
sides the body, such as both arms or both legs.
Dorsal rhizotomy—A surgical procedure that cuts
nerve roots to reduce spasticity in affected muscles.
Dyskinesia—Impaired ability to make voluntary
movements.
Hemiplegia—Paralysis of one side of the body.
Hypotonia—Reduced or diminished muscle tone.
Quadriplegia—Paralysis of all four limbs.
Serial casting—A series of casts designed to gradu-
ally move a limb into a more functional position.
Spastic—A condition in which the muscles are
rigid, posture may be abnormal, and fine motor
control is impaired.
Spasticity—Increased mucle tone, or stiffness,
which leads to uncontrolled, awkward movements.
Static encephalopathy—A disease of the brain that
does not get better or worse.
Tenotomy—A surgical procedure that cuts the ten-
don of a contracted muscle to allow lengthening.
is sometimes referred to as acquired CP, but this is only
accurate for those cases caused by infection or trauma.
Incompatibility between the Rh blood types of
mother and child (mother Rh negative, baby Rh positive)
can result in severe anemia in the baby (erythroblastosis
fetalis). This may lead to other complications, including
severe jaundice, which can cause CP. Rh disease in the
newborn is now rare in developed countries due to rou-
tine screening of maternal blood type and treatment of
pregnancies at risk. The routine, effective treatment of
jaundice due to other causes has also made it an infre-
quent cause of CP in developed countries. Rh blood type
poses a risk for recurrence of Rh disease if treatment is
not provided.
Serious infections that affect the brain directly, such
as meningitis and encephalitis, may cause irreversible
damage to the brain, leading to CP. A seizure disorder
early in life may cause CP, or may be the product of a
hidden problem that causes CP in addition to seizures.
Unexplained (idiopathic) seizures are hereditary in only
a small percentage of cases. Although rare in infants born
healthy at or near term, intracerebral hemorrhage and
brain embolism, like fetal stroke, are sometimes genetic.
Physical trauma to an infant or child resulting in
brain injury, such as from abuse, accidents, or near
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
703