None

urine and menstrual blood. Infibulation accounts for
approximately 15% of FGM procedures.
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates
that between 100 million and 140 million girls and
women have undergone some form of FGM. As a very
deeply rooted cultural and religious tradition still prac-
ticed in over 28 African and Asian countries, up to two
million girls per year are at risk. The following countries
have the highest number of occurrences of FGM: Dji-
bouti (98%), Egypt (97%), Eritrea (95%), Guinea (99%),
Mali (94%), Sierra Leone (90%), and Somalia (98-
100%). As more people move to Western countries from
countries where female circumcision is performed, the
practice has come to the attention of health professionals
in the United States, Canada, Europe, and Australia.
In an effort to integrate old customs with modern
medical care, some immigrant families have requested
that physicians perform the procedure. While trying to
be sensitive to cultural traditions,
health care
providers are sometimes put in the difficult position of
choosing to perform this procedure in a medical facili-
ty under sanitary conditions, or refusing the request,
knowing that it may be done anyway with no medical
supervision. Some families who are intent on having
this procedure done will take their daughters back to
the country they immigrated from in order to have the
girls circumcised.
Many national and international medical organiza-
tions including the American Medical Association
(AMA), Canadian medical organizations, and WHO
oppose the practice of female genital mutilation. The
United Nations (UN) considers female genital mutilation
a violation of human rights. WHO has undertaken a num-
ber of projects aimed at decreasing the incidence of
FGM. These include the following activities:
• publishing a statement addressing the regional status of
FGM and encouraging the development of national pol-
icy against its practice,
• organizing training for regional community workers,
• developing educational materials for local health care
workers,
• providing alternative occupations for individuals who
perform FGM procedures.