None

Access site—The vein tapped for vascular access
in hemodialysis treatments. For patients with tem-
porary treatment needs, access to the bloodstream
is gained by inserting a catheter into the subcla-
vian vein near the patient’s collarbone. Patients in
long-term dialysis require stronger, more durable
access sites, called fistulas or grafts, that are surgi-
cally-created.
Dialysate—A chemical bath used in dialysis to
draw fluids and toxins out of the bloodstream and
supply electrolytes and other chemicals to the
bloodstream.
Dialysis prescription—The general parameters of
dialysis treatment that vary according to each
patient’s individual needs. Treatment length, type
of dialyzer and dialysate used, and rate of ultrafil-
tration are all part of the dialysis prescription.
Dialyzer—An artificial kidney usually composed
of hollow fiber that is used in hemodialysis to
eliminate waste products from the blood and
remove excess fluids from the bloodstream.
Erythropoietin—A hormone produced by the kid-
neys that stimulates the production of red blood
cells by bone marrow.
ESRD—End-stage renal disease; chronic or perma-
nent kidney failure.
Extracorporeal circuit (ECC)—The path the
hemodialysis patient’s blood takes outside of the
body. It typically consists of plastic tubing, a
hemodialysis machine, and a dialyzer.
Hematocrit (Hct) level—A measure of red blood
cells.
Peritoneum—The abdominal cavity; the peri-
toneum acts as a blood filter in peritoneal dialysis.
in the dialysate solution cross the membrane into the
blood compartment. The purified, chemically-balanced
blood is then returned to the body.
Most hemodialysis patients require treatment three
times a week, for an average of three to four hours per
dialysis “run.” Specific treatment schedules depend on
the type of dialyzer used and the patient’s current physi-
cal condition. While the treatment prescription and regi-
men is usually overseen by a nephrologist (a doctor that
specializes in the kidney), dialysis treatments are typical-
ly administered by a nurse or patient care technician in
outpatient clinics known as dialysis centers, or in hospi-
tal-based dialysis units. In-home hemodialysis treatment
is also an option for some patients, although access to
this type of treatment may be limited by financial and
lifestyle factors. An investment in equipment is required
and another person in the household should be available
for support and assistance with treatments.