None

avoided. Nutritional supplements such as vitamins, min-
erals, antioxidants, amino acids, and essential fatty acids
are often prescribed. Spirulina is a sea algae that is fre-
quently given to assist in eliminating heavy metals.
Lipotropic agents are certain vitamins and nutrients that
promote the flow of bile and fat from the liver.
Many herbal supplements are used in detoxification
therapies as well. Milk thistle extract, called silymarin, is
one of the more potent herbs for detoxifying the liver.
Naturopathy, Ayurvedic medicine, and traditional Chi-
nese medicine (TCM) recommend numerous herbal for-
mulas for detoxification and immune strengthening. If
infections or parasites have been found, these are treated
with herbal formulas and, in difficult cases, antibiotics. 
For toxic bowel syndrome and digestive tract disor-
ders, herbal laxatives and high fiber foods such as psylli-
um seeds may be given to cleanse the digestive tract and
promote elimination. Colonics are used to cleanse the
lower intestines. Digestive enzymes are prescribed to
improve digestion, and acidophilus and other friendly
bacteria are reintroduced into the system with nutritional
supplements.
Fasting is another major therapy in detoxification.
Fasting is one of the quickest ways to promote the elimina-
tion of stored toxins in the body and to prompt the healing
process. People with severe toxic conditions are supervised
closely during fasting because the number of toxins in the
body temporarily increases as they are being released.
Chelation therapy is used by detoxification special-
ists to rid the body of heavy metals. Chelates are particu-
lar substances that bind to heavy metals and speed their
elimination. Homeopathic remedies have also been
shown to be effective for removing heavy metals.
Sweating therapies can also detoxify the body
because the skin is a major organ of elimination. Sweating
helps release those toxins that are stored in the subcuta-
neous (under the skin) fat cells. Saunas, therapeutic baths,
and exercise are some of these treatments. Body therapies
may also be prescribed, including massage therapy, acu-
pressure, shiatsu, manual lymph drainage, and polarity
therapy. These body therapies seek to improve circulatory
and structural problems, reduce stress, and promote heal-
ing responses in the body. Mind/body therapies such as
psychotherapy, counseling, and stress management tech-
niques may be used to heal the psychological components
of illness and to help patients overcome their negative pat-
terns contributing to illness.