None

Drugs that commonly interact with other medica-
tions include:
• Diuretics. Diuretics such as hydrochlorothiazide can
reduce serum potassium and sodium electrolyte levels
when taken with digoxin and lithium, respectively.
• Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). MAOI antide-
pressants can cause convulsions and other serious side
effects when used with tricyclic antidepressants (e.g.,
Imipramine, Nortriptyline), selective serotonin reup-
take inhibitors (SSRIs), or sympathomimetic drugs
(e.g., amphetamines).
• Antibiotics. Antibiotics may reduce the efficiency of
oral contraceptives.
• Metals. Medications containing metals, such as
antacids with aluminum additives and iron supple-
ments, can reduce the absorption of tetracyclines and
fluoroquinolones.
• Drugs that inhibit liver enzyme function. Drugs that
slow drug metabolism include ciprofloxacin, ery-
thromycin, fluoxetine, nefazodone, paroxetine, and
ritonavir. The therapeutic effect of other medications
taken with these drugs may be amplified. Warfarin, a
blood thinner, should be used with great caution in indi-
viduals taking these drugs.
Foods and beverages that may interact with drugs
include:
• Grapefruit juice. Grapefruit juice inhibits the metabo-
lism of many medications, including cyclosporine,
felodipine, nifedipine, nitrendipine, nisoldipine, carba-
mazepine, triazolam, and midazolam.
• Foods and beverages with tyramines. Red wine, malted
beers, smoked foods (e.g., fish and meats), dried fruits,
and aged cheeses may contain tyramines, and can cause
a severe and dangerous elevation in blood pressure
when taken with MAOI inhibitors (a class of antide-
pressants).
• Dairy products. Milk, cream, and other dairy products
containing calcium can prevention the absorption of
antibiotics such as tetracycline, doxycycline, and
ciprofloxacin when they are taken with the drug. In
addition, whole milk with vitamin D can cause milk-
alkali syndrome in patients taking aluminum hydroxide
antacids.
• Caffeinated beverages. The caffeine contained in cof-
fee and colas can influence drug metabolism.
• Alcohol. Alcohol is a central nervous system depressant,
and should not be taken with other CNS depressants
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1102
Drug metabolism/interactions
(e.g., antipsychotics, antihistamines). In addition, cer-
tain fermented beverages may contain tyramines 
This list is not all-inclusive and individuals should
always let their doctor and pharmacist know when they
are taking other medications, herbal remedies, or dietary
supplements. Anyone who experiences a serious reaction
to a drug that is not consistent with its product labelling
should report the event to their doctor and/or the Med-
Watch adverse event reporting system of the United
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA).