None

TDM is a practical tool that can help the physician
provide effective and safe drug therapy in patients who
need medication. Monitoring can be used to confirm a
blood drug concentration level that is above or below the
therapeutic range, or if the desired therapeutic effect of
the drug is not as expected. If this is the case, and
dosages beyond normal then have to be prescribed, TDM
can minimize the time that elapses.
TDM is important for patients who have other dis-
eases that can affect drug levels, or who take other medi-
cines that may affect drug levels by interacting with the
drug being tested. As an example, without drug monitor-
ing, the physician cannot be sure if a patient’s lack of
response to an antibiotic reflects bacterial resistance, or
is the result of failure to reach the proper therapeutic
range of antibiotic concentration in the blood. In cases of
life-threatening infections, timing of effective antibiotic
therapy is critical to success. It is equally crucial to avoid
toxicity in a seriously ill patient. Therefore, if toxic
symptoms appear with standard dosages, TDM can be
used to determine changes in dosing.
Drawn blood, used for TDM, demonstrates a drug
action in the body at any specific time, whereas drug lev-
els examined from urine samples reflect the presence of a
drug over many days (depending on the rate of excre-
tion). Therefore, blood testing is the procedure of choice
when definite data are required. However, for adequate
absorption and therapeutic levels to be accurate, it is
important to allow for sufficient time to pass between the
administration of the medication and the collection of the
blood sample.
Blood specimens for drug monitoring can be taken
at two different times: during the drug’s highest thera-
peutic concentration (“peak” level), or its lowest
(“trough” level). Occasionally called residual levels,
trough levels show sufficient therapeutic levels; whereas
peak levels show poisoning (toxicity). Peak and trough
levels should fall within the therapeutic range.