None

sciousness or fainting. They are related to a reduced flow
of blood to the brain; they often occur when a person is
standing up and can be relieved by sitting or lying down.
Vertigo is characterized by a sensation of spinning or turn-
ing, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, ringing in the ears,
headache, or fatigue. An individual may have trouble
walking, remaining coordinated, or keeping balance. Non-
syncope nonvertigo dizziness is characterized by a feeling
of being off balance that becomes worse if the individual
tries moving or performing detail-intense tasks.
A person may experience dizziness for many rea-
sons. Syncope is associated with low blood pressure,
heart problems, and disorders in the autonomic nervous
system, the system of involuntary functions such as
breathing. Syncope may also arise from emotional dis-
tress, pain, and other reactions to outside stressors. Non-
syncope nonvertigo dizziness may be caused by rapid
breathing, low blood sugar, or migraine headache, as
well as by more serious medical conditions.
Vertigo is often associated with inner ear problems
called vestibular disorders. A particularly intense vestibular
disorder, Méniére’s disease, interferes with the volume of
fluid in the inner ear. This disease, which affects approxi-
mately one in every 1,000 people, causes intermittent verti-
go over the course of weeks, months, or years. Méniére’s
disease is often accompanied by ringing or buzzing in the
ear, hearing loss, and a feeling that the ear is blocked.
Damage to the nerve that leads from the ear to the brain can
also cause vertigo. Such damage can result from head
injury or a tumor. An acoustic neuroma, for example, is a
benign tumor that wraps around the nerve. Vertigo can also
be caused by disorders of the central nervous system and
the circulatory system, such as hardening of the arteries
(arteriosclerosis), stroke, or multiple sclerosis.
Some medications cause changes in blood pressure
or blood flow. These medications can cause dizziness in
some people. Prescription medications carry warnings
of such side effects, but common drugs, such as caf-
feine or nicotine can also cause dizziness. Certain
antibiotics can damage the inner ear and cause hearing
loss and dizziness.
Diet may cause dizziness. The role of diet may be
direct, as through alcohol intake. It may be also be indi-
rect, as through arteriosclerosis caused by a high-fat diet.
Some people experience a slight dip in blood sugar and
mild dizziness if they miss a meal, but this condition is
rarely dangerous unless the person is diabetic. Food sen-
sitivities or allergies can also be a cause of dizziness.
Chronic conditions, such as heart disease, and serious
acute problems, such as seizures and strokes, can cause
dizziness. However, such conditions usually exhibit other
characteristic symptoms.