In the early 1900s, the research of Dr. William
Sutherland, an American osteopathic physician, detailed
the movement of the cranium and pelvis. Before his
research it was believed that the cranium was a solid
immovable mass. Sutherland reported that the skull is
actually made up of 22 separate and movable bones that
are connected by layers of tissue. He called his work cra-
nial osteopathy. Nephi Cotton, an American chiroprac-
tor and contemporary of Sutherland, called this approach
craniology. The graduates of these two disciplines have
refined and enhanced these original approaches and
renamed their work as sacro-occipital technique, cranial
movement therapy, or craniosacral therapy.
Dr. John Upledger, an osteopathic physician, and
others at the Department of Biomechanics at Michigan
State University, College of Osteopathic Medicine
learned of Sutherland’s research and developed it further.
He researched the clinical observations of various osteo-
pathic physicians. This research provided the basis for
Upledger’s work that he named craniosacral therapy.
Craniosacral therapy addresses the craniosacral sys-
tem. This system includes the cranium, spine, and
sacrum that are connected by a continuous membrane of
connective tissue deep inside the body, called the dura
mater. The dura mater also encloses the brain and the
central nervous system. Sutherland noticed that cerebral
spinal fluid rises and falls within the compartment of the
dura mata. He called this movement the primary respira-
tory impulse; today it is known as the craniosacral
rhythm (CSR) or the cranial wave.
Craniosacral therapists can most easily feel the CSR
in the body by lightly touching the base of the skull or
the sacrum. During a session, they feel for disturbances
in the rate, amplitude, symmetry, and quality of flow of
the CSR. A therapist uses very gentle touch to balance
the flow of the CSR. Once the cerebrospinal fluid moves
freely, the body’s natural healing responses can function.
A craniosacral session generally lasts 30–90 min-
utes. The client remains fully clothed and lays down on a
massage table while the therapist gently assesses the
flow of the CSR. Upledger describes several techniques
which may be used in a craniosacral therapy session. The
first is energy cyst release. “This technique is a hands-on
method of releasing foreign or disruptive energies from
the patient’s body. Energy cysts may cause the disruption
of the tissues and organs were they are located.” The
therapist feels these cysts in the client’s body and gently
releases the blockage of energy.
Sutherland first wrote about a second practice called
direction of energy. In this technique the therapist intends
energy to pass from one of his hands, through the patient,
into the other hand.

None