genetic defects, typically on chromosome 21, allow accu-
mulation of amyloid, a protein made up of units called
beta-pleated sheet fibrils. The fibrils tend to clump togeth-
er, so that the amyloid cannot be dissolved and builds up
in the brain blood vessel walls. One form of amyloid fibril
subunit proteins is the amyloid beta protein.
Different theories have been suggested for the
source of amyloid beta protein in the brain. The systemic
theory suggests that amyloid beta protein in the blood
stream is deposited in blood vessels in the brain, causing
weakness in the blood vessel wall and breakdown in the
blood-brain barrier. Normally, the blood-brain barrier
keeps proteins and other large molecules from escaping
from the blood vessel to the brain tissue. When there is
breakdown of the blood-brain barrier, amyloid beta pro-
tein leaks through the blood vessel wall, and is deposited
in the brain substance, where it forms an abnormal struc-
ture called a neuritic plaque.
A second, more likely theory is that amyloid fibrils
that form amyloid beta protein are produced by perivas-
cular microglia, or support cells in contact with the brain
blood vessel wall. The third theory is that the brain tissue
gives rise to amyloid beta protein. Both the nerve cells
and the glia are known to produce amyloid precursor
protein, which increases with aging and with cell stress.
Bleeding into the brain may occur as tiny blood ves-
sels carrying amyloid deposits become heavier and more
brittle, and are therefore more likely to burst with minor
trauma or with fluctuating blood pressure. Aneurysms, or
ballooning of the blood vessel wall, may develop, and
may also rupture as the stretched wall becomes thinner
and is under more pressure. Amyloid deposits may
destroy smooth muscle cells or cause inflammation in the
blood vessel wall. This may also cause the blood vessel
to break more easily.
The most common form of CAA is the sporadic
form associated with aging. This type of CAA usually
causes lobar hemorrhage, which may recur in different
lobes of the brain. The frontal lobe (behind the forehead)
and parietal lobe (behind the frontal lobe) are most often
affected; the temporal lobe (near the temple) and occipi-
tal lobe (at the back of the brain) are affected less often;
and the cerebellum (under the occipital lobe) is rarely
affected. Approximately 10–50% of hemorrhages in spo-
radic CAA involve more than one lobe.

None