Used for thousands of years, fasting is one of the
oldest therapies in medicine. Many of the great doctors
of ancient times and many of the oldest healing systems
have recommended it as an integral method of healing
and prevention. Hippocrates, the father of Western medi-
cine, believed fasting enabled the body to heal itself.
Paracelsus, another great healer in the Western tradition,
wrote 500 years ago that “fasting is the greatest remedy,
the physician within.” Ayurvedic medicine, the world’s
oldest healing system, has long advocated fasting as a
major treatment.
Fasting has also been used in nearly every religion in
the world, including Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism,
and Islam. Many of history’s great spiritual leaders fasted
for mental and spiritual clarity, including Jesus, Buddha,
and Mohammed. In one of the famous political acts of
the last century, the Indian leader Mahatma Gandhi fast-
ed for 21 days to promote peace.
Fasting has been used in Europe as a medical treat-
ment for years. Many spas and treatment centers, particu-
larly those in Germany, Sweden, and Russia, use med-
ically supervised fasting. Fasting has gained popularity
in American alternative medicine over the past several
decades, and many doctors feel it is beneficial. Fasting is
a central therapy in detoxification, a healing method
founded on the principle that the build up of toxic sub-
stances in the body is responsible for many illnesses and
conditions.
The principle of fasting is simple. When the intake
of food is temporarily stopped, many systems of the
body are given a break from the hard work of digestion.
The extra energy gives the body the chance to heal and
restore itself, and burning stored calories gets rid of toxic
substances stored in the body.
The digestive tract is the part of the body most
exposed to environmental threats, including bacteria,
viruses, parasites, and toxins. It requires the most
immune system support. When food is broken down in
the intestines, it travels through the blood to the liver, the
largest organ of the body’s natural detoxification system.
The liver breaks down and removes the toxic by-products
produced by digestion, including natural ones and the
chemicals now present in the food supply. During fast-
ing, the liver and immune system are essentially freed to
detoxify and heal other parts of the body.
Many healers claim that fasting is a particularly use-
ful therapy for Americans and for the modern lifestyle,
subjected to heavy diets, overeating, and constant expo-
sure to food additives and chemicals. Some alternative
practitioners have gone so far as to estimate that the aver-
age American is carrying 5-10 pounds of toxic sub-
stances in their bodies, for which fasting is the quickest
and most effective means of removal.

None