None

The bone marrow is the tissue within the bone cavi-
ties that contains blood-forming cells. Healthy bone
marrow tissue constantly replenishes the blood supply
and is essential to life. Sometimes, the amount of drugs
or radiation needed to destroy cancer cells also destroys
bone marrow. Replacing the bone marrow with healthy
cells counteracts this adverse effect. A bone marrow
transplant is the removal of marrow from one person and
the transplant of the blood-forming cells either to the
same person or to someone else. Bone-marrow trans-
plantation, while not a therapy in itself, is often used to
“rescue” a patient, by allowing those with cancer to
undergo very aggressive therapy.
Many different specialists generally work together
as a team to treat cancer patients. An oncologist is a
physician who specializes in cancer care. The oncologist
provides chemotherapy, hormone therapy, and any other
non-surgical treatment that does not involve radiation.
The oncologist often serves as the primary physician and
coordinates the patient’s treatment plan.
The radiation oncologist specializes in using radia-
tion to treat cancer, while the surgical oncologist performs
the operations needed to diagnose or treat cancer. Gyne-
cologist-oncologists and pediatric-oncologists, as their
titles suggest, are physicians involved with treating
women’s and children’s cancers respectively. Many other
specialists may also be involved in the care of a cancer
patient. For example, radiologists specialize in the use of
x rays, ultrasounds, computed tomography scans (CT
scans), MRI imaging and other techniques that are used to
diagnose cancer. Hematologists specialize in disorders of
the blood and are consulted in case of blood cancers and
bone marrow cancers. The samples that are removed for
biopsy are sent to a laboratory, where a pathologist exam-
ines them to determine the type of cancer and extent of
the disease. Only some of the specialists who are involved
with cancer care have been mentioned above. There are
many other specialties, and virtually any type of medical
or surgical specialist may become involved with care of
the cancer patient should it become necessary.