None

• cytomegalovirus infection
• HIV
• herpes simplex
• herpes zoster (shingles)
• herpes B
• polio
• rabies
• mosquito-borne viruses (arboviruses)
Primary encephalitis is caused by direct infection by
the virus, while secondary encephalitis is due to a post-
infectious immune reaction to viral infection elsewhere in
the body. Secondary encephalitis may occur with measles,
chickenpox, mumps, rubella, and EBV. In secondary
encephalitis, symptoms usually begin five to 10 days after
the onset of the disease itself and are related to the break-
down of the myelin sheath that covers nerve fibers.
In rare cases, encephalitis may follow vaccination
against some of the viral diseases listed above.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a very rare brain disorder
caused by an infectious particle called a prion, may also
cause encephalitis.
Mosquitoes spread viruses responsible for equine
encephalitis (eastern and western types), St. Louis
encephalitis, California encephalitis, and Japanese
encephalitis. Lyme disease, spread by ticks, can cause
encephalitis, as can Colorado tick fever. Rabies is most
often spread by animal bites from dogs, cats, mice, rac-
coons, squirrels, and bats and may cause encephalitis.
Equine encephalitis is carried by mosquitoes that do
not normally bite humans but do bite horses and birds. It
is occasionally picked up from these animals by mosqui-
toes that do bite humans. Japanese encephalitis and St.
Louis encephalitis are also carried by mosquitoes. The
risk of contracting a mosquito-borne virus is greatest in
mid- to late summer, when mosquitoes are most active,
in those rural areas where these viruses are known to
exist. Eastern equine encephalitis occurs in eastern and
southeastern United States; western equine and Califor-
nia encephalitis occur throughout the West; and St. Louis
encephalitis occurs throughout the country. Japanese
encephalitis does not occur in the United States, but is
found throughout much of Asia. The viruses responsible
for these diseases are classified as arbovirus and these
diseases are collectively called arbovirus encephalitis.
Herpes simplex encephalitis, the most common form
of sporadic encephalitis in western countries, is a disease
with significantly high mortality. It occurs in children and
adults and both sides of the brain are affected. It is theo-
rized that brain infection is caused by the virus moving
from a peripheral location to the brain via two nerves, the
olfactory and the trigeminal (largest nerves in the skull).
Herpes simplex encephalitis is responsible for 10%
of all encephalitis cases and is the main cause of spo-
radic, fatal encephalitis. In untreated patients, the rate of
death is 70% while the mortality is 15–20% in patients
who have been treated with acyclovir. The symptoms of
herpes simplex encephalitis are fever, rapidly disintegrat-
ing mental state, headache, and behavioral changes.