None

normal as possible. Sometimes, multiple surgical proce-
dures are necessary. Surgical procedures include: arterial
switch, balloon atrial septostomy, balloon valvulo-
plasty, Damus-Kaye-Stansel procedure, Fontan proce-
dure, pulmonary artery banding, Ross procedure, shunt
procedure, and venous switch or intra-atrial baffle.
Arterial switch, to correct transposition of the great
arteries, involves connecting the aorta to the left ventricle
and connecting the pulmonary artery to the right ventri-
cle. Balloon atrial septostomy, also done to correct trans-
position of the great arteries, enlarges the atrial opening
during heart catheterization. Balloon valvuloplasty uses a
balloon-tipped catheter to open a narrowed heart valve,
improving the flow of blood in pulmonary stenosis. It is
sometimes used in aortic stenosis. Transposition of the
great arteries can also be corrected by the Damus-Kaye-
Stansel procedure, in which the pulmonary artery is cut
in two and connected to the ascending aorta and the far-
thest section of the right ventricle.
For tricuspid atresia and pulmonary atresia, the
Fontan procedure connects the right atrium to the pul-
monary artery directly or with a conduit, and the atrial
defect is closed. Pulmonary artery banding, narrowing
the pulmonary artery with a band to reduce blood flow
and pressure in the lungs, is used for ventricular septal
defect, atrioventricular canal defect, and tricuspid atresia.
Later, the band can be removed and the defect corrected
with open-heart surgery.
To correct aortic stenosis, the Ross procedure grafts
the pulmonary artery to the aorta. For tetralogy of Fallot,
tricuspid atresia, or pulmonary atresia, the shunt proce-
dure creates a passage between blood vessels, sending
blood into parts of the body that need it. For transposi-
tion of the great arteries, venous switch creates a tunnel
inside the atria to re-direct oxygen-rich blood to the right
ventricle and aorta and venous blood to the left ventricle
and pulmonary artery.
When all other options fail, some patients may need
a heart transplant. Children with congenital heart disease
require lifelong monitoring, even after successful
surgery. The American Heart Association recommends
regular dental check-ups and the preventive use of
antibiotics to protect patients from heart infections, or
endocarditis. Since children with congenital heart dis-
ease have slower growth, nutrition is important. Physi-
cians may also limit their athletic activity.