None

Acidosis—A condition that causes the pH of the
blood to drop and become more acidic.
Diabetes mellitus—Disease characterized by the
inability of the body to produce or respond properly
to insulin, which is required by the body to convert
glucose to energy.
Edema—The presence of abnormally large amounts
of fluid in the intercellular tissue spaces of the body.
Glucose—The type of sugar found in the blood.
Hyperglycemia—Condition characterized by exces-
sively high levels of glucose in the blood, and
occurs when the body does not have enough
insulin or cannot use the insulin it does have to turn
glucose into energy. Hyperglycemia is often indica-
tive of diabetes that is out of control.
Hyperketonemia—Condition characterized by an
overproduction of ketones by the body.
Hypoglycemia—Lower than normal levels of glu-
cose in the blood.
Hypokalemia—A deficiency of potassium in the
blood.
Insulin—A hormone secreted by the pancreas in
response to high blood sugar levels that induces
hypoglycemia. Insulin regulates the body’s use of
glucose and the levels of glucose in the blood by
acting to open the cells so that they can intake glu-
cose.
Ketones—Poisonous acidic chemicals produced by
the body when fat instead of glucose is burned for
energy. Breakdown of fat occurs when not enough
insulin is present to channel glucose into body cells.
Lactic acidosis—A serious condition caused by the
build up of lactic acid in the blood, causing it to
become excessively acidic. Lactic acid is a by-prod-
uct of glucose metabolism.
Metabolism—The sum of all chemical reactions
that occur in the body resulting in growth, transfor-
mation of foodstuffs into energy, waste elimination
and other bodily functions.
Polyuria—Excessive secretion of urine.
Type I diabetes—Also called juvenile diabetes. Type
I diabetes typically begins early in life. Affected
individuals have a primary insulin deficiency and
must take insulin to stay alive.
Type II diabetes—Type II diabetes is the most com-
mon form of diabetes and usually appears in middle
aged adults. It is often associated with obesity and
may be delayed or controlled with diet and exercise.
ing periods of stress, infection, and trauma when glucose
concentrations typically increase as a response to these
situations. Ketone tests should also be performed during
these periods or when glucose is elevated.