None

FAS is not a genetic or inherited disorder. It is a pat-
tern of birth defects, learning, and behavioral problems
that are the result of maternal alcohol use during the
pregnancy. The alcohol freely crosses the placenta and
causes damage to the developing embryo or fetus. Alco-
hol use by the father cannot cause FAS. If a woman who
has FAS drinks alcohol during pregnancy, then she may
also have a child with FAS. Not all individuals from
alcohol exposed pregnancies have obvious signs or
symptoms of FAS; individuals of different genetic back-
grounds may be more or less susceptible to the damage
that alcohol can cause. The dose of alcohol, the time dur-
ing pregnancy that alcohol is used, and the pattern of
alcohol use all contribute to the different signs and symp-
toms that are found.
Classic features of FAS include short stature, low
birthweight and poor weight gain, microcephaly, and a
characteristic pattern of facial features. These facial fea-
tures in infants and children may include small eye open-
ings (measured from inner corner to outer corner), epican-
thal folds (folds of tissue at the inner corner of the eye),
small or short nose, low or flat nasal bridge, smooth or
poorly developed philtrum (the area of the upper lip above
the colored part of the lip and below the nose), thin upper
lip, and small chin. Some of these features are nonspecific,
meaning they can occur in other conditions, or be appro-
priate for age, racial, or family background. Other major
and minor birth defects that have been reported include
cleft palate, congenital heart defects, strabismus, hearing
loss, defects of the spine and joints, alteration of the hand
creases, small fingernails, and toenails. Since FAS was
first described in infants and children, the diagnosis is
sometimes more difficult to recognize in older adolescents
and adults. Short stature and microcephaly remain com-
mon features, but weight may normalize, and the individ-
ual may actually become overweight for his/her height.
The chin and nose grow proportionately more than the
middle part of the face and dental crowding may become a
problem. The small eye openings and the appearance of
the upper lip and philtrum may continue to be characteris-
tic. Pubertal changes typically occur at the normal time.
Newborns with FAS may have difficulties with feed-
ing due to a poor suck, have irregular sleep-wake cycles,
decreased or increased muscle tone, seizures or tremors.
Delays in achieving developmental milestones such as
rolling over, crawling, walking and talking may become
apparent in infancy. Behavior and learning difficulties typ-
ical in the preschool or early school years include poor
attention span, hyperactivity, poor motor skills, and slow
language development. Attention deficit-hyperactivity dis-
order is a common associated diagnosis. Learning disabili-
ties or mental retardation may be diagnosed during this
time. Arithmetic is often the most difficult subject for a
child with FAS. During middle school and high school
years the behavioral difficulties and learning difficulties
can be significant. Memory problems, poor judgment, dif-
ficulties with daily living skills, difficulties with abstract
reasoning skills, and poor social skills are often apparent
by this time. It is important to note that animal and human
studies have shown that neurologic and behavioral abnor-
malities can be present without characteristic facial fea-
tures. These individuals may not be identified as having
FAS, but may fulfill criteria for alcohol- related diagnoses,
as set forth by the Institute of Medicine.
In 1991, Streissguth and others reported some of the
first long-term follow-up studies of adolescents and
adults with FAS. In the approximate 60 individuals they
studied, the average IQ was 68, with 70 being the lower
limit of the normal range. However, the range of IQ was
quite large, as low as 20 (severely retarded) to as high as
105 (normal). The average achievement levels for read-
ing, spelling, and arithmetic were fourth grade, third
grade and second grade, respectively. The Vineland
Adaptive Behavior Scale was used to measure adaptive
functioning in these individuals. The composite score for
this group showed functioning at the level of a seven-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1310