Colds are caused by more than 200 different viruses.
The most common groups are rhinoviruses and coron-
aviruses. Different groups of viruses are more infectious
at different seasons of the year, but knowing the exact
virus causing the cold is not important in treatment.
People with colds are contagious during the first two
to four days of the infection. Colds pass from person to
person in several ways. When an infected person coughs,
sneezes, or speaks, tiny fluid droplets containing the virus
are expelled. If these are breathed in by other people, the
virus may establish itself in their noses and airways.
Colds may also be passed through direct contact. If a
person with a cold touches his runny nose or watery eyes,
then shakes hands with another person some of the virus is
transferred to the uninfected person. If that person then
touches his mouth, nose, or eyes, the virus is transferred to
an environment where it can reproduce and cause a cold.
Finally, cold viruses can be spread through inani-
mate objects (door knobs, telephones, toys) that become
contaminated with the virus. This is a common method
of transmission in child care centers. If a child with a
cold touches his runny nose, then plays with a toy, some
of the virus may be transferred to the toy. When another
child plays with the toy a short time later, he may pick up
some of the virus on his hands. The second child then
touches his contaminated hands to his eyes, nose, or
mouth and transfers some of the cold virus to himself.
Once acquired, the cold virus attaches itself to the
lining of the nasal passages and sinuses. This causes the
infected cells to release a chemical called histamine. His-
tamine increases the blood flow to the infected cells,
causing swelling, congestion, and increased mucus pro-
duction. Within one to three days the infected person
begins to show cold symptoms.
The first cold symptoms are a tickle in the throat,
runny nose, and sneezing. The initial discharge from the
nose is clear and thin. Later it changes to a thick yellow
or greenish discharge. Most adults do not develop a fever
when they catch a cold. Young children may develop a
low fever of up to 102°F (38.9°C).
In addition to a runny nose and fever, signs of a cold
include coughing, sneezing, nasal congestion, headache,
muscle ache, chills, sore throat, hoarseness, watery
eyes, tiredness, and lack of appetite. The cough that
accompanies a cold is usually intermittent and dry.
Most people begin to feel better four to five days
after their cold symptoms become noticeable. All symp-
toms are generally gone within ten days, except for a dry
cough that may linger for up to three weeks.
Colds make people more susceptible to bacterial
infections such as strep throat, middle ear infections, and
sinus infections. A person whose cold does not begin to
improve within a week; or who experiences chest pain,
fever for more than a few days, difficulty breathing,
bluish lips or fingernails, a cough that brings up green-
ish-yellow or grayish sputum, skin rash, swollen glands,
or whitish spots on the tonsils or throat should consult a
doctor to see if they have acquired a secondary bacterial
infection that needs to be treated with an antibiotic.
People who have emphysema, chronic lung disease,
diabetes, or a weakened immune system—either from
diseases such as AIDS or leukemia, or as the result of
medications, (corticosteroids, chemotherapy drugs)—
should consult their doctor if they get a cold. People with
these health problems are more likely to get a secondary
infection.

None