the pressure in the CBD rises, as would a pipe closed off
at one end. The increase in pressure eventually causes the
bile to flow into the gallbladder. During meals, the gall-
bladder contracts and the sphincter between the gallblad-
der and intestine relaxes, permitting bile to flow into the
intestine and take part in digestion.
Bile that has just been produced by the liver is sterile
(free of bacteria). This is partly due to its antibacterial
properties; these are produced by the immunoglobulins
(antibodies) secreted in bile, the bile acids which inhibit
bacterial growth themselves, and mucus.
A small number of bacteria may be present in the bile
ducts and gallbladder, getting there by moving backward
from the intestine, which unlike the bile ducts, contains
large numbers of bacteria. The normal flow of bile out of
the ducts and into the intestine also helps keep too many
organisms from multiplying. Bacteria also reach the bile
ducts from the lymph tissue or from the blood stream.
When the passage of bile out of the ducts is blocked,
the few bacteria that are there rapidly reproduce. A par-
tial blockage to the flow of bile can occur when a stone
from the gallbladder blocks the duct, and also allows
bacteria to flow back into the CBD, and creates ideal
conditions for their growth. Tumors, on the other hand,
cause a more complete blockage of bile flow, both in and
out, so fewer infections occur. The reproducing organ-
isms are often able to enter the bloodstream and infect
multiple organs such as the liver and heart valves.
Another source of inflammation of the bile ducts
occurs in diseases of altered immunity, known as “autoim-
mune diseases.” In these diseases, the body fails to recog-
nize certain cells as part of its normal composition. The
body thinks these cells are foreign and produces antibod-
ies to fight them off, just as it fights against bacteria and
viruses. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a typical exam-
ple of an autoimmune disease involving the bile ducts.

None