None

Once the cryptococcal fungus reaches the lungs,
three things can happen. The immune system can heal
the body without medical intervention, the disease can
stay localized in the lungs, or it can spread throughout
the body. In healthy people with normally functioning
immune systems, the body usually heals itself, and the
infected person notices no symptoms and has no compli-
cations (asymptomatic). The disease does not spread
from one person to another.
Cryptococcosis is an opportunistic infection that
puts people with immune system diseases at higher risk
of developing more serious forms of the disease. In the
United States, 6–10% of all patients with AIDS get cryp-
tococcosis.
If the body does not heal itself, the fungus begins to
grow in the lungs and form nodules that can be seen on
chest x rays. In the early stages of infection, an individ-
ual usually only exhibits symptoms of a respiratory
infection, such as a dry cough, so the disease is rarely
diagnosed.
The fungus can remain dormant in the lungs and
produce an active infection later if the immune system is
weakened. If the disease becomes active, it can cause
cryptococcal pneumonia in the lungs. Unfortunately,
however, cryptococcal pneumonia has symptoms similar
to other pneumonias (cough, chest pain, difficulty
breathing), making it difficult to accurately diagnose.
The infection can spread to other parts of the body, par-
ticularly the brain and central nervous system.
Most patients are not diagnosed as having crypto-
coccosis until they show signs of cryptococcal meningi-
tis, or infection of the membranes surrounding the brain
and spinal cord. Symptoms appear gradually over a peri-
od of two to four weeks. Fever and headache are the
most common symptoms, occurring in about 85% of
patients. Nausea, vomiting, unwanted weight loss, and
fatigue are also common. Other symptoms seen in
25–30% of patients are blurred vision, stiff neck, aver-
sion to light, and seizures. Since the symptoms of classic
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
964