Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease, meaning it is
caused by a defect in the person’s genes. Genes, found in
the nucleus of all the body’s cells, control cell function
by serving as the blueprint for the production of proteins.
Proteins carry out a wide variety of functions within
cells. The gene that, when defective, causes CF, is called
the CFTR gene, which stands for cystic fibrosis trans-
membrane conductance regulator. A simple defect in this
gene leads to all the consequences of CF. There are over
500 known defects in the CFTR gene that can cause CF.
However, 70% of all people with a defective CFTR gene
have the same defect, known as delta-F508.
Much as sentences are composed of long strings of
words, each made of letters; genes can be thought of as
long strings of chemical words, each made of chemical
letters, called nucleotides. Just as a sentence can be
changed by rearranging its letters, genes can be mutated,
or changed, by changes in the sequence of their
nucleotide letters. The gene defects in CF are called
point mutations, meaning that the gene is mutated only at
one small spot along its length. In other words, the delta-
F508 mutation is a loss of one “letter” out of thousands
within the CFTR gene. As a result, the CFTR protein
made from its blueprint is made incorrectly, and cannot
perform its function properly.
The CFTR protein helps to produce mucus. Mucus is
a complex mixture of salts, water, sugars, and proteins that
cleanses, lubricates, and protects many passageways in the
body, including those in the lungs and pancreas. The role
of the CFTR protein is to allow chloride ions to exit the
mucus-producing cells. When the chloride ions leave these
cells, water follows, thinning the mucus. In this way, the
CFTR protein helps to keep mucus from becoming thick
and sluggish, thus allowing the mucus to be moved steadi-
ly along the passageways to aid in cleansing.
In CF, the CFTR protein cannot allow chloride ions
out of the mucus-producing cells. With less chloride
leaving, less water leaves, and the mucus becomes thick
and sticky. It can no longer move freely through the pas-
sageways, so they become clogged. In the pancreas,
clogged passageways prevent secretion of digestive
enzymes into the intestine, causing serious impairment
of digestion—especially of fat—which may lead to mal-
nutrition. Mucus in the lungs may plug the airways, pre-
venting good air exchange and, ultimately, leading to
emphysema. The mucus is also a rich source of nutrients
for bacteria, leading to frequent infections.
INHERITANCE OF CYSTIC FIBROSIS. To understand
the inheritance pattern of CF, it is important to realize that
genes actually have two functions. First, as noted above,
they serve as the blueprint for the production of proteins.
Second, they are the material of inheritance: parents pass
on characteristics to their children by combining the
genes in egg and sperm to make a new individual.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
984

None