None

Normally when a person breathes fresh air into the
lungs, the oxygen in the air binds with a molecule called
hemoglobin (Hb) that is found in red blood cells. This
allows oxygen to be moved from the lungs to every part
of the body. When the oxygen/hemoglobin complex
reaches a muscle where it is needed, the oxygen is
released. Because the oxygen binding process is
reversible, hemoglobin can be used over and over again
to pick up oxygen and move it throughout the body.
Inhaling carbon monoxide gas interferes with this
oxygen transport system. In the lungs, CO competes with
oxygen to bind with the hemoglobin molecule. Hemo-
globin prefers CO to oxygen and accepts it more than
200 times more readily than it accepts oxygen. Not only
does the hemoglobin prefer CO, it holds on to the CO
much more tightly, forming a complex called carboxyhe-
moglobin (COHb). As a person breathes CO contaminat-
ed air, more and more oxygen transportation sites on the
hemoglobin molecules become blocked by CO. Gradual-
ly, there are fewer and fewer sites available for oxygen.
All cells need oxygen to live. When they don’t get
enough oxygen, cellular metabolism is disrupted and
eventually cells begin to die.
The symptoms of CO poisoning and the speed with
which they appear depend on the concentration of CO in
the air and the rate and efficiency with which a person
breathes. Heavy smokers can start off with up to 9% of
their hemoglobin already bound to CO, which they regu-
larly inhale in cigarette smoke. This makes them much
more susceptible to environmental CO. The Occupation-
al Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has estab-
lished a maximum permissible exposure level of 50 parts
per million (ppm) over eight hours.
With exposure to 200 ppm for two to three hours, a
person begins to experience headache, fatigue, nausea,
and dizziness. These symptoms correspond to 15–25%
COHb in the blood. When the concentration of COHb
reaches 50% or more, death results in a very short time.
Emergency room physicians have the most experience
diagnosing and treating CO poisoning.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
651