None

(1873–1954)
William Garner Sutherland studied osteopathy
under its founder, Andrew Taylor Still. Dr. Sutherland
made his own important discovery while examining the
sutures of cranial bones the skull bones that protect the
brain. What he noticed is that the sutures were designed
for motion. Sutherland termed this motion the Breath of
Life. Through his experiments and research he deter-
mined that primary respiration was essential to all other
physiological functions.
When Sutherland developed his techniques for
craniosacral therapy, he wanted it to serve as a vehicle
for listening to the body’s rhythmic motions and treat the
patterns of inertia when those motions become congest-
ed. He believed that the stresses—any physical or emo-
tional trauma—created an imbalance in the body that
needed correction to restore it to full health. The therapy
is a hands-on method so that the therapist can feel the
subtleties of the patterns of movement and inertia.
Sutherland felt that this was the way to encourage self-
healing and restoration of the body’s own mechanisms,
taking a holistic approach to creating optimal health.
The Craniosacral Therapy Educational Trust, based
on Sutherland’s pioneering work, is located at 10 Norm-
ington Close, Leigham Court Road, London SW16 2QS,
United Kingdom. The phone number is 07000 785778.
The third technique is called myofascial release.
This is a manipulative form of bodywork that releases
tension in the fascia or connective tissue of the body.
This form of bodywork uses stronger touch.
Upledger’s fourth technique is position of release.
This involves following the client’s body into the posi-
tions in which an injury occurred and holding it there.
When the rhythm of the CSR suddenly stops the therapist
knows that the trauma has been released.
The last technique is somatoemotional release. This
technique was developed by Upledger and is an offshoot
of craniosacral therapy. It is used to release the mind and
body of the residual effects of trauma and injury that are
“locked in the tissues.”
The cost of a session varies due to the length of time
needed and the qualifications of the therapist. The cost
may be covered by insurance when the therapy is per-
formed or prescribed by a licensed health care provider.