remove their glasses and put them on again. They are also
not very suitable for lenses that correct a high degree of
farsightedness, because such lenses are thin at the edges.
Metal frames are less noticeable than plastic, and
they are lightweight. They are available in solid gold,
gold-filled, anodized aluminum, nickel, silver, stainless
steel, and now titanium and titanium alloy. Until the late
1980s, when titanium-nickel alloy and titanium frames
were introduced, metal frames were, in general, more
fragile than plastic frames. The titanium frames, howev-
er, are very strong and lightweight. An alloy of titanium
and nickel, called Flexon, is not only strong and light-
weight, but returns to its original shape after being twist-
ed or dented. It is not perfect for everyone, though,
because some people are sensitive to its nickel. Flexon
frames are also relatively expensive.
Plastic frames are durable, can accommodate just
about any lens prescription, and are available in a wide
range of prices. They are also offered in a variety of plas-
tics (including acrylic, epoxy, cellulose acetate, cellulose
propionate, polyamide, and nylon) and in different colors,
shapes, and levels of resistance to breakage. Epoxy
frames are resilient and return to their original shape after
being deformed, so they do not need to be adjusted as fre-
quently as other types. Nylon frames are almost unbreak-
able. They revert to their original shape after extreme
trauma and distortion; because of this property, though,
they cannot be readjusted after they are manufactured.
FIT. The patient should have the distance between
the eyes (PD) measured, so that the optical centers of the
lenses will be in front of the patient’s pupils. Bifocal
heights also have to be measured with the chosen frame
in place and adjusted on the patient. Again, this is so the
lenses will be positioned correctly. If not positioned cor-
rectly, the patient may experience eyestrain or other
problems. This can occur with over-the-counter reading
glasses. The distance between the lenses is for a “stan-
dard” person. Generally, this will not be a problem, but if
a patient is sensitive or has more closely set eyes, for
example, it may pose a problem. Persons buying ready-
made sunglasses or reading glasses should hold them up
to see if they appear clear. They should also hold the
lenses to see an object with straight lines reflected off of
the lenses. If the lines don’t appear straight, the lenses
may be warped or inferior.
Patients may sometimes need a few days to adjust to
a new prescription; however, problems should be report-
ed, because the glasses may need to be rechecked.

None