Tick-borne disease—A disease that is spread to
animals by the bite of an infected tick.
ty of injury is determined primarily by the voltage, low
voltage can be just as dangerous as high voltage under
the right circumstances. People have been killed by
shocks of just 50 volts.
How electric shocks affect the skin is determined by
the skin’s resistance, which in turn is dependent upon the
wetness, thickness, and cleanliness of the skin. Thin or wet
skin is much less resistant than thick or dry skin. When
skin resistance is low, the current may cause little or no
skin damage but severely burn internal organs and tissues.
Conversely, high skin resistance can produce severe skin
burns but prevent the current from entering the body.
The nervous system (the brain, spinal cord, and
nerves) is particularly vulnerable to injury. In fact, neuro-
logical problems are the most common kind of nonlethal
harm suffered by electric shock victims. Some neurological
damage is minor and clears up on its own or with medical
treatment, but some is severe and permanent. Neurological
problems may be apparent immediately after the accident,
or gradually develop over a period of up to three years.
Damage to the respiratory and cardiovascular systems
is most acute at the moment of injury. Electric shocks can
paralyze the respiratory system or disrupt heart action,
causing instant death. Also at risk are the smaller veins and
arteries, which dissipate heat less easily than the larger
blood vessels and can develop blood clots. Damage to the
smaller vessels is probably one reason why amputation is
often required following high-voltage injuries.
Many other sorts of injuries are possible after an
electric shock, including cataracts, kidney failure, and
substantial destruction of muscle tissue. The victim may
suffer a fall or be hit by debris from exploding equip-
ment. An electric arc may set clothing or nearby flamma-
ble substances on fire. Strong shocks are often accompa-
nied by violent muscle spasms that can break and dislo-
cate bones. These spasms can also freeze the victim in
place and prevent him or her from breaking away from
the source of the current.

None