None

Nerves convey information to the body by sending
electrical signals down the length of the nerve. These sig-
nals can be recorded by wires placed over the nerves on
the surface of the skin, in a procedure called an evoked
potential (EP) study. The person conducting the test
evokes the patient’s neural activity by visual or auditory
stimulation or using a mild electrical shock. This causes
changes in the electrical potential in the nerves. Analysis
of the signals can provide information about the condi-
tion of nerve pathways, especially those in the brain and
spinal cord. They can indicate the presence of disease or
degeneration, and can help determine the location of
nerve lesions.
There are three major types of EP studies used regu-
larly:
• Visual evoked potentials are used to diagnose visual
losses due to optic nerve damage, especially from mul-
tiple sclerosis. They are also useful to diagnose “hys-
terical blindness,” in which loss of vision is not due to
any nerve damage.
• Auditory evoked potentials are used to diagnose hearing
losses. They can distinguish damage to the acoustic nerve
(which carries signals from the ear to the brain stem)
from damage to the auditory pathways within the brain-
stem. Most auditory EPs record activity from the brain-
stem, and are therefore called “brainstem auditory evoked
potentials.” Disorders diagnosed with auditory EPs
include acoustic neuroma (tumors of the inner ear) and
multiple sclerosis (chronic disease in which nerves lose
patches of their outer covering). They may also be used to
assess high frequency hearing ability, to determine brain
death, and to monitor brainstem function during surgery
• Somatosensory evoked potentials record transmission of
nerve impulses from the limbs to the brain, and can be
used to diagnose nerve damage or degeneration within
the spinal cord or nerve roots from multiple sclerosis,
trauma, or other degenerative disease. Somatosensory
EPs can be used to distinguish central versus peripheral
nerve disease, when combined with results from a nerve
conduction velocity test, which measures nerve function
in the extremities.