None

The human eye has several parts. The outer layer of
the eyeball consists of a transparent dome-shaped cornea
and an opaque, white sclera. The cornea and sclera help
protect the eye. The next layer includes the iris, pupil, and
ciliary body. The iris is the colored part of the eye and the
pupil is the small dark round hole in the middle of the iris.
The pupil and iris allow light into the eye. The ciliary body
contains muscles that help in the eye’s focusing ability.
The lens lies behind the pupil and iris. It is covered by a
cellophane-like capsule. The lens is normally transparent,
elliptical in shape, and somewhat elastic. This elasticity
allows the lens to focus on both near and far objects. The
lens is attached to the ciliary body by fibers (zonules of
Zinn). Muscles in the ciliary body act on the zonules,
which then change the shape of the lens. This process is
called accommodation—the lens focuses images to help
make vision clear. As people age, the lens hardens and
changes shape less easily. As a result, the accommodation
process becomes more difficult, making it harder to see
things up close. This generally occurs around the age of 40
and continues until about age 65. The condition is called
presbyopia. It is a normal condition of aging, generally
resulting in the need for reading glasses.
The lens is made up of approximately 35% protein
and 65% water. As people age, degenerative changes in
the lens’ proteins occur. Changes in the proteins, water
content, enzymes, and other chemicals are some of the
reasons for the formation of a cataract.
The major areas of the lens are the nucleus, the cor-
tex, and the capsule. The nucleus is in the center of the
lens, the cortex surrounds the nucleus, and the capsule is
the outer layer. Opacities can occur in any area of the
lens. Cataracts, then, can be classified according to loca-
tion (nuclear, cortical, or posterior subcapular cataracts).
The density and location of the cataract determines the
amount of vision affected. If the cataract forms in the area
of the lens directly behind the pupil, vision may be signif-
icantly impaired. A cataract that occurs on the outer edges
or side of the lens will create less of a visual problem.
Cataracts in the elderly are so common that they are
thought to be a normal part of the aging process.
Between the ages of 52 and 64, there is a 50% chance of
having a cataract, while at least 70% of those 70 and
older are affected. Cataracts associated with aging (senile
or age-related cataracts) most often occur in both eyes,
with each cataract progressing at a different rate. Initial-
ly, cataracts may not affect vision. If the cataract remains
small or at the periphery of the lens, the visual changes
may be minor.
Cataracts that occur in people other than the elderly
are much less common. Congenital cataracts occur very
rarely in newborns. Genetic defects or an infection or
disease in the mother during pregnancy are among the
causes of congenital cataracts. Traumatic cataracts may
develop after a foreign body or trauma injures the lens or
eye. Systemic illnesses, such as diabetes, may result in
cataracts. Cataracts can also occur secondary to other eye
diseases—for example, an inflammation of the inner
layer of the eye (uveitis) or glaucoma. Such cataracts are
called complicated cataracts. Toxic cataracts result from
chemical toxicity, such as steroid use. Cataracts can also
result from exposure to the sun’s ultraviolet (UV) rays.