Diverticula are believed to be caused by overly
forceful contractions of the muscular wall of the large
intestine. As areas of this wall spasm, they become weak-
er and weaker, allowing the inner lining to bulge through.
The anatomically weakest areas of the intestinal wall
occur next to blood vessels which course through the
wall, so diverticula commonly occur in this location.
Diverticula are most common in the developed
countries of the West (North America, Great Britain,
northern and western Europe). This is thought to be due
to the diet of these countries, which tends to be quite low
in fiber. A diet low in fiber results in the production of
smaller volumes of stool. In order to move this smaller
stool along the colon and out of the rectum, the colon
must narrow itself significantly, and does so by contract-
ing down forcefully. This causes an increase in pressure,
which, over time, weakens the muscular wall of the intes-
tine and allows diverticular pockets to develop.
The origin of giant diverticula development is not
completely understood, although one theory involves gas
repeatedly entering and becoming trapped in an already-
existing diverticulum, causing stretching and expansion
of that diverticulum.
The great majority of people with diverticulosis will
remain symptom-free. Many diverticula are quite acci-
dentally discovered during examinations for other condi-
tions of the intestinal tract.
Some people with diverticulosis have symptoms such
as constipation, cramping, and bloating. It is unclear
whether these symptoms are actually caused by the diver-
ticula themselves, or whether some other gastrointestinal
condition (such as irritable bowel syndrome) might be
responsible. A complication of diverticulosis occurs
because many diverticula develop in areas very near
blood vessels. Therefore, one serious risk of diverticulosis
involves bleeding. Although an infrequent complication,
the bleeding can be quite severe. Seventy-five percent of
such bleeding episodes occur due to diverticula located on
the right side of the colon. About 50% of the time, such
bleeding will stop on its own.
One of the most common and potentially serious
complications of diverticulosis is inflammation and infec-
tion of a particular diverticulum, called diverticulitis.
Diverticulitis is three times more likely to occur in
the left side of the large intestine. Since most diverticula
are located in the sigmoid colon (the final segment of the
large intestine which empties into the rectum), most
diverticulitis also takes place in the sigmoid. The elderly
have the most serious complications from diverticulitis,
although very severe infections can also occur in patients
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1091

None