None

Celiac disease can run in families and has a genetic
basis, although the pattern of inheritance is complicated.
The type of inheritance pattern that celiac disease fol-
lows is called multifactorial (caused by many factors,
both genetic and environmental). Researchers think that
several factors must exist in order for the disease to
occur. The patient must have a genetic predisposition to
develop the disorder. Then, something in their environ-
ment acts as a stimulus, or “trigger,” to their immune sys-
tem, causing the disease to become active for the first
time. For conditions with multifactorial inheritance, peo-
ple without the genetic predisposition are less likely to
develop the condition with exposure to the same triggers.
Or, they may require more exposure to the stimulus
before developing the disease than someone with a
genetic predisposition. Some of the things which may
provoke a reaction include surgery, especially gastroin-
testinal surgery; a change to a low fat diet, which has an
increased number of wheat-based foods; pregnancy;
childbirth; severe emotional stress; or a viral infection.
This combination of genetic susceptibility and an outside
agent leads to celiac disease.
Each person with celiac disease is affected different-
ly. When food containing gluten reaches the small intes-
tine, the immune system begins to attack a substance
called gliadin, which is found in the gluten. The resulting
inflammation causes damage to the delicate finger-like
structures in the intestine, called villi, where food absorp-
tion actually takes place. The patient may experience a
number of symptoms related to the inflammation and the
chemicals it releases, and/or the lack of ability to absorb
nutrients from food, which can cause malnutrition.
The most commonly recognized symptoms of celiac
disease relate to the improper absorption of food in the
gastrointestinal system. Many patients with gastrointesti-
nal symptoms will have diarrhea and fatty, greasy,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
681