Avulsion fracture—A fracture caused by the tearing
away of a fragment of bone where a strong ligament
or tendon attachment forcibly pulls the fragment
away from the bone tissue.
Axis—A line that passes through the center of the
body or body part.
Comminuted fracture—A fracture where there are
several breaks in a bone creating numerous frag-
ments.
Compartment syndrome—Compartment syndrome
is a condition in which a muscle swells but is con-
stricted by the connective tissue around it, which
cuts off blood supply to the muscle.
Contrast hydrotherapy—A series of hot and cold
water applications. A hot compress (as hot as an
individual can tolerate) is applied for three minutes
followed by an ice cold compress for 30 seconds.
These applications are repeated three times each
and ending with the cold compress.
Osteogenesis imperfecta—A genetic disorder
involving defective development of connective tis-
sues, characterized by brittle and fragile bones that
are easily fractured by the slightest trauma.
Osteoporosis—Literally meaning “porous bones,”
this condition occurs when bones lose an excessive
amount of their protein and mineral content, partic-
ularly calcium. Over time, bone mass and strength
are reduced leading to increased risk of fractures.
Paget’s disease—Chromic disorder of unknown
cause, usually affecting middle aged and elderly
people, characterized by enlarged and deformed
bones. Excessive breakdown and formation of bone
tissue occurs with Paget’s disease and can cause
bone to weaken, resulting in bone pain, arthritis,
deformities, and fractures.
Reduction—The restoration of a body part to its
original position after displacement, such as the
reduction of a fractured bone by bringing ends or
fragments back into original alignment. The use of
local or general anesthesia usually accompanies a
fracture reduction. If performed by outside manipu-
lation only, the reduction is described as closed; if
surgery is necessary, it is described as open.
Rickets—A condition caused by the dietary defi-
ciency of vitamin D, calcium, and usually phospho-
rus, seen primarily in infancy and childhood, and
characterized by abnormal bone formation.
Traction—The process of placing a bone, limb, or
group of muscles under tension by applying weights
and pulleys. The goal is to realign or immobilize the
part or to relieve pressure on that particular area to
promote healing and restore function.
a metal instrument with a stem and two prongs that
vibrate when struck. If an individual has increased pain
when the tuning fork is placed on a bone, such as the
tibia or shinbone, the likelihood of a stress fracture is
high. Bone scans also are helpful in detecting stress frac-
tures. In this diagnostic procedure, a radioactive tracer is
injected into the bloodstream and images are taken of
specific areas or the entire skeleton by CT or MRI.

None