None

Because of the variety of ways celiac disease can
manifest itself, it is often not discovered promptly. Its
symptoms are similar to many other conditions including
irritible bowel syndrome, Crohn’s disease, ulcerative
colitis, diverticulosis, intestinal infections, chronic
fatigue syndrome, and depression. The condition may
persist without diagnosis for so long that the patient
accepts a general feeling of illness as normal. This leads
to further delay in identifying and treating the disorder. It
is not unusual for the disease to be identified in the
course of medical investigations for seemingly unrelated
problems. For example, celiac disease has been discov-
ered during testing to find the cause of infertility.
If celiac disease is suspected, a blood test can be
ordered. This test looks for the antibodies to gluten (called
antigliadin, anti-endomysium, and antireticulin) that the
immune system produces in celiac disease. Antibodies are
chemicals produced by the immune system in response to
substances that the body perceives to be threatening. Some
experts advocate not just evaluating patients with symp-
toms, but using these blood studies as a screening test for
high-risk individuals, such as those with relatives (espe-
cially first degree relatives) known to have the disorder. An
abnormal result points towards celiac disease, but further
tests are needed to confirm the diagnosis. Because celiac
disease affects the ability of the body to absorb nutrients
from food, several tests may be ordered to look for nutri-
tional deficiencies. For example, doctors may order a test
of iron levels in the blood because low levels of iron (ane-
mia) may accompany celiac disease. Doctors may also
order a test for fat in the stool, since celiac disease pre-
vents the body from absorbing fat from food.
If these tests above are suspicious for celiac disease,
the next step is a biopsy (removal of a tiny piece of tissue
surgically) of the small intestine. This is usually done by a
gastroenterologist, a physician who specializes in diagnos-
ing and treating bowel disorders. It is generally performed
in the office, or in a hospital’s outpatient department. The
patient remains awake, but is sedated. A narrow tube,
called an endoscope, is passed through the mouth, down
through the stomach, and into the small intestine. A small
sample of tissue is taken and sent to the laboratory for
analysis. If it shows a pattern of tissue damage characteris-
tic of celiac disease, the diagnosis is established.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
682