None

Allergen—Any substance that irritates people sen-
sitive (allergic) to it.
Allergic rhinitis—Swelling and inflammation of
the nasal membranes caused by sensitivity to air-
borne matter like pollen or cat hair.
Saline—A salt solution in water. Normal saline has
the same salt concentration as the body, 0.9%.
Sinuses—The nasal sinuses, air-filled cavities sur-
rounding the eyes and nose, like the nose itself are
lined with mucus-producing membranes. They
provide cleansing to the nose, resonance to the
voice, and structure to the face.
Sinusitis—Infection of the sinuses.
Sleep apnea—A condition in which breathing is
temporarily interrupted during sleep. It leads to
high blood pressure, sleepiness, and a variety of
other problems.
released. ADH influences the amount of fluid that the
kidneys reabsorb into the circulatory system and the
amount of fluid that the kidneys pass out of the body in
the form of urine.
Production of ADH is regulated by the osmolality of
the circulating blood. Osmolality refers to the concentra-
tion of dissolved chemicals (such as sodium, potassium,
and chloride; together called solute) circulating in the
fluid base of the blood (plasma). When there is very little
fluid compared to the concentration of solute, the pitu-
itary will increase ADH production. This tells the kid-
neys to retain more water and to decrease the amount of
urine produced. As fluid is retained, the concentration of
solute will normalize. At other times, when the fluid con-
tent of the blood is high in comparison to the concentra-
tion of solute, ADH production will decrease. The kid-
neys are then free to pass an increased amount of fluid
out of the body in the urine. Again, this will allow the
plasma osmolality to return to normal.
Diabetes insipidus occurs when either the amount of
ADH produced by the pituitary is below normal (central
DI), or the kidneys’ ability to respond to ADH is defective
(nephrogenic DI). In either case, a person with DI will
pass extraordinarily large quantities of urine, sometimes
reaching 10 or more liters each day. At the same time, the
patient’s blood will be very highly concentrated, with low
fluid volume and high concentrations of solute.
DI occurs on average when a person is about 24
years old, and occurs more frequently in males than in
females.