may appear four to 21 days after being
exposed to the virus. Initial symptoms are flu-like and
include headache, body ache, sore throat, a mild fever
of 101°F (38.3°C), and chills. It is at this time, prior to
the development of the rash, that individuals are conta-
gious. These symptoms last for two to three days. In chil-
dren, a bright red rash that looks like a slap mark devel-
ops suddenly on the cheeks. The rash may be flat or
raised and may or may not be itchy. Sometimes, the rash
spreads to the arms, legs, and trunk, where it has a lace-
like or net-like appearance. The rash can also involve the
palms of the hands and soles of the feet. By the time the
rash appears, individuals are no longer infectious. On
average, the rash lasts for 10–11 days, but may last for as
long as five to six weeks. The rash may fade away and
then reappear upon exposure to sunlight, hot baths, emo-
tional distress, or vigorous exercise.
Adults generally do not develop a rash, but instead may
have swollen and painful joints, especially in the hands and
feet. In adults, symptoms such as sore throat, headache,
muscle and joint pain, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and vom-
iting occur more frequently than in children and are usually
more severe. The joint pain can be arthritis-like and last for
several months, especially in women, but the disease does
not appear to progress to rheumatoid arthritis.
The virus causes the destruction of red blood cells
and, therefore, a deficiency in the oxygen-carrying
capacity of the blood (anemia) can result. In healthy peo-
ple, the anemia is mild and only lasts a short while. In
people with weakened immune systems, however, either
because they have a chronic disease like AIDS or cancer
(immunocompromised), or are receiving medication to
suppress the immune system (immunosuppressed), such
as organ transplant recipients, this anemia can be severe
and last long after the infection has subsided. Symptoms
of anemia include fatigue, lack of color, lack of energy,
and shortness of breath. Some individuals with sickle
cell anemia, iron deficiency, a number of different hered-
itary blood disorders, and those who have received bone
marrow transplantations may be susceptible to develop-
ing a potentially life-threatening complication called a
transient aplastic crisis where the body is temporarily
unable to form new red blood cells.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1328

Symptoms