None

Childhood health problems may be congenital (i.e.,
present at birth) or acquired through infection, immune
system deficiency, or another disease process. They may
also be caused by physical trauma (e.g., a car accident or
a playground fall) or a toxic substance (e.g., an allergen,
drug, or poisonous chemical), or triggered by genetic or
environmental factors.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
763
Children’s health
DR. BENJAMIN SPOCK (1903–1998)
Benjamin Spock, pediatrician and political activist,
was most noted for his authorship of Baby and Child
Care, which significantly changed predominant attitudes
toward the raising of infants and children. He began med-
ical school at Yale University in 1925, and transferred to
Columbia University’s College of Physicians and Sur-
geons in 1927. Spock had decided well before starting his
medical studies that he would “work with children, who
have their whole lives ahead of them” and so, upon tak-
ing his M.D. degree in 1929 and serving his general
internship at the prestigious Presbyterian Hospital, he
specialized in pediatrics at a small hospital crowded with
children in New York’s Hell’s Kitchen area.
On a summer vacation in 1943 he began to write his
most famous book and he continued to work on it from
1944 to 1946 while serving as a medical officer in the
Navy. The book sharply broke with the authoritarian tone
and rigorous instructions found in earlier generations of
baby-care books, most of which said to feed infants on a
strict schedule and not to pick them up when they cried.
Spock, who spent ten years trying to reconcile his psycho-
analytic training with what mothers were telling him about
their children, told his readers “You know more than you
think you do. Don’t be afraid to trust your own common
sense. Take it easy, trust your own instincts, and follow the
directions that your doctor gives you.” The response was
overwhelming. Baby and Child Care rapidly became
America’s all-time best-seller except for Shakespeare and
the Bible; by 1976 it had also eclipsed Shakespeare.
(Library of Congress.)
Physical and mental health problems in childhood
can cause a wide spectrum of symptoms. However, the
following behaviors frequently signify a larger emotion-
al, social, or mental disturbance:
• signs of alcohol and drug use
• falling grades
• lack of interest in activities that were previously enjoy-
able to the child
• excessive anxiety
• persistent, prolonged depression
• withdrawal from friends and family
• violence
• temper tantrums or inappropriate displays of anger
• self-inflicted injury
• bizarre behavior and/or speech
• trouble with the police
• sexual promiscuity
• suicide attempts
The causes of developmental disorders and delays
and learning disabilities are not always fully understood.
Pervasive developmental disorder (PDD) and autistic
spectrum disorder (more commonly known as autism)
are characterized by unresponsiveness and severe impair-
ments in one or more of the following areas:
• Social interaction. Autistic children are often unaware
of acceptable social behavior and are withdrawn and
socially isolated. They frequently do not like physical
contact.
• Communication and language. A child with autism or
PDD may not speak or may display limited or imma-
ture language skills.
• Behavior. Autistic or PDD children may have difficulty
dealing with anger, can be self-injurious, and may dis-
play obsessive behavior.
Autism is associated with brain abnormalities, but
the exact mechanisms that trigger the disorder are yet to
be determined. It has been linked to certain congenital
conditions such as neurofibromatosis, fragile X syn-
drome, and phenylketonuria (PKU).