It is not uncommon to have local discomfort in the
form of aches, pains, or spasms for a few days following
DANIEL PALMER (1845–1913)
Chiropractic inventor, Daniel David Palmer, was
born on March 7, 1845, in Toronto, Ontario. He was
one of five siblings, the children of a shoemaker and his
wife, Thomas and Katherine Palmer. Daniel Palmer and
his older brother fell victim to wanderlust and left Cana-
da with a tiny cash reserve in April 1865. They immi-
grated to the United States on foot, walking for 30 days
before arriving in Buffalo, New York. They traveled by
boat through the St. Lawrence Seaway to Detroit, Michi-
gan. There they survived by working odd jobs and sleep-
ing on the dock. Daniel Palmer settled in What Cheer,
Iowa, where he supported himself and his first wife as a
grocer and fish peddler in the early 1880s. He later
moved to Davenport, Iowa, where he raised three
daughters and one son.
Palmer was a man of high curiosity. He investigated
a variety of disciplines of medical science during his
lifetime, many of which were in their infancy. He was
intrigued by phrenology and assorted spiritual cults, and
for nine years he investigated the relationship between
magnetism and disease. Palmer felt that there was one
thing that caused disease. He was intent upon discover-
ing this one thing, or as he called it: the great secret.
In September 1895, Palmer purported to have cured
a deaf man by placing pressure on the man’s displaced
vertebra. Shortly afterward Palmer claimed to cure
another patient of heart trouble, again by adjusting a dis-
placed vertebra. The double coincidence led Palmer to
theorize that human disease might be the result of dislo-
cated or luxated bones, as Palmer called them. That
same year he established the Palmer School of Chiro-
practic where he taught a three-month course in the sim-
ple fundamentals of medicine and spinal adjustment.
Palmer, who was married six times during his life,
died in California in 1913; he was destitute. His son,
Bartlett Joshua Palmer, successfully commercialized the
practice of chiropractic.
a chiropractic treatment. Some patients may also experi-
ence mild headache or fatigue that resolves quickly.

None