CPR is part of the emergency cardiac care system
designed to save lives. Many deaths can be prevented by
prompt recognition of the problem and notification of the
emergency medical system (EMS), followed by early
CPR, defibrillation (which delivers a brief electric
shock to the heart in attempt to get the heart to beat nor-
mally), and advanced cardiac life support measures.
CPR must be performed within four to six minutes
after cessation of breathing so as to prevent brain damage
or death. It is a two-part procedure that involves rescue
breathing and external chest compressions. To provide
oxygen to a person’s lungs, the rescuer administers mouth-
to-mouth breaths, then helps circulate blood through the
heart to vital organs by external chest compressions.
Mouth-to-mouth breathing and external chest compression
should be performed together, but if the rescuer is not
strong enough to do both, the external chest compressions
should be done. This is more effective than no resuscita-
tion attempt, as is CPR that is performed “poorly.”
When performed by a bystander, CPR is designed to
support and maintain breathing and circulation until
emergency medical personnel arrive and take over. When
performed by healthcare personnel, it is used in conjunc-
tion with other basic and advanced life support measures.
According to the American Heart Association, early
CPR and defibrillation combined with early advanced
emergency care can increase survival rates for people
with a type of abnormal heart beat called ventricular
fibrillation by as much as 40%. CPR by bystanders may
prolong life during deadly ventricular fibrillation, giving
emergency medical service personnel time to arrive.
However, many CPR attempts are not ultimately
successful in restoring a person to a good quality of life.
Often, there is brain damage even if the heart starts beat-
ing again. CPR is therefore not generally recommended
for the chronically or terminally ill or frail elderly. For
these people, it represents a traumatic and not a peaceful
end of life.
Each year, CPR helps save thousands of lives in the
United States. More than five million Americans annual-
ly receive training in CPR through American Heart Asso-
ciation and American Red Cross courses. In addition to
courses taught by instructors, the American Heart Asso-
ciation also has an interactive video called Learning Sys-
tem, which is available at more than 500 healthcare insti-
tutions. Both organizations teach CPR the same way, but
use different terms. These organizations recommend that
family members or other people who live with people
who are at risk for respiratory or cardiac arrest be trained
in CPR. A hand-held device called a CPR Prompt is
available to walk people trained in CPR through the pro-
cedure, using American Heart Association guidelines.
CPR has been practiced for more than 40 years.

None