FMF is a genetic condition inherited in an autosomal
recessive fashion. Mutations in the MEFV gene (short
for Mediterranean Fever) on chromosome number 16 are
the underlying cause of FMF. Autosomal recessive inher-
itance implies that a person with FMF has mutations in
both copies of the MEFV gene. All genes come in pairs,
and one copy of each pair is inherited from each parent.
If neither parent of a child with FMF has the condition, it
means they carry one mutated copy of the MEFV gene,
but also one normal copy, which is enough to protect
them from disease. If both parents carry the same autoso-
mal recessive gene, there is a one in four chance in each
pregnancy that the child will inherit both recessive
genes, and thus have the condition.
The MEFV gene carries the instructions for produc-
tion of a protein called pyrin, named for pyrexia, a med-
ical term for fever. The research group in France that co-
discovered the protein named it marenostrin, after ancient
Latin words that referred to the Mediterranean Sea. The
movement of neutrophils into an area of the body where
trauma or infection has occurred is the major cause of
inflammation, which is a normal process. Research has
shown that pyrin has some function in controlling neu-
trophils. In a situation where minor trauma or stress
occurs, some initial inflammation may follow, but a func-
tional pyrin protein is responsible for shutting-down the
response of neutrophils once they are no longer needed.
An abnormal pyrin protein associated with FMF may be
partly functional, but unstable. In some instances, the
abnormal pyrin itself seems to be “stressed”, and loses its
ability to regulate neutrophils and inflammation. Left
unregulated, a normal, mild inflammation spirals out of
control. Exactly what causes pyrin in FMF to lose its abil-
ity to control neutrophils in some situations is not known.
The recurrent acute attacks of FMF typically begin
in childhood or adolescence. Episodes of fever and
painful inflammation usually last 12–72 hours. About
90% of people with FMF have their first attack by age
20. The group of symptoms that characterizes FMF
includes the following:

None