None

Aorta
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery builds a detour around one or more blocked coronary arteries with a graft from a
healthy vein or artery.The graft goes around the clogged artery (or arteries) to create new pathways for oxygen-rich blood to
flow to the heart. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
ple who are healthy except for the heart disease do well
with bypass surgery. Patients who have poorer results from
coronary artery bypass graft surgery include those over the
age of 70, those who have poor left ventricular function, or
are undergoing a repeat surgery or other procedures con-
currently, and those who continue smoking, do not treat
high cholesterol or other coronary risk factors, or have
another debilitating disease.
Long term, symptoms recur in only about 3–4% of
patients per year. Five years after coronary artery bypass
graft surgery, survival expectancy is 90%, at 10 years it is
about 80%, at 15 years it is about 55%, and at 20 years it
is about 40%.
Angina recurs in about 40% of patients after about
10 years. In most cases, it is less severe than before the
surgery and can be controlled by drug therapy. In patients
who have had vein grafts, 40% of the grafts are severely
obstructed 10 years after the procedure. Repeat coronary
artery bypass graft surgery may be necessary, and is usu-
ally less successful than the first surgery.
Minimally invasive coronary artery bypass graft
surgery
There are two new types of minimally invasive coro-
nary artery bypass graft surgery: port-access coronary
artery bypass (also called PACAB or PortCAB) and min-
imally invasive coronary artery bypass (also called MID-
CAB). These procedures are minimally invasive because
they do not require the neck-to-navel incision, sawing
through the breastbone, or opening the rib cage to expose
the heart. Both procedures enable surgeons to work on
the coronary arteries through small chest holes called
ports and other small incisions. Port-access coronary
artery bypass requires the use of a heart-lung machine
but minimally invasive coronary artery bypass does not.
Advantages of these procedures over standard coronary
artery bypass graft surgery include a shorter hospital
stay, a shorter recovery period, and lower costs.
Port-access coronary artery bypass enables surgeons
to perform bypasses through smaller incisions. Using a
video monitor to view the procedure, the surgeon passes
instruments through ports in the patient’s chest to per-
form the bypass. Mammary arteries or leg veins are used
for the grafts. Minimally invasive coronary artery bypass
is performed on a beating heart and is appropriate only
for bypasses of one or two arteries. Small ports are made
in the patient’s chest, along with a small incision directly
over the coronary artery to be bypassed. Generally, the
surgeon uses a mammary artery for the bypass.
Early data on outcomes for port-access coronary artery
bypass and minimally invasive coronary artery bypass are
favorable. Mortality rates with port-access coronary artery
bypass and minimally invasive coronary artery bypass are
both less than 3%—about the same as in standard coronary
artery bypass graft surgery. One clinical trial indicated that
survival at seven years was the same in minimally invasive
coronary artery bypass and standard coronary artery bypass
graft surgery, but that another intervention was necessary
five times more often with minimally invasive coronary
artery bypass than with standard coronary artery bypass
graft surgery. The American Heart Association Council on
Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Surgery feels that both pro-
cedures appear promising but that further study is needed.
More data covering longer term outcomes are necessary in
order to fully assess these procedures.