Some conditions that cause coma can be completely
reversed, restoring the individual to his or her original
level of functioning. However, if areas of the brain have
been sufficiently damaged due to the severity or duration
of the condition which led to the coma, the individual
may recover from the coma with permanent disabilities,
or may even never regain consciousness. Take, for exam-
ple, the situation of someone whose coma was caused by
brain injury in a car accident. Such an injury can result in
one of three outcomes. In the event of a less severe brain
injury, with minimal swelling, an individual may indeed
recover consciousness and regain all of his or her original
abilities. In the event of a more severe brain injury, with
swelling that resulted in further pressure on areas of the
brain, an individual may regain consciousness, but may
have some degree of impairment. The impairment may
be physical (such as paralysis of a leg) or may even
result in a change in the individual’s intellectual func-
tioning and/or personality. The most severe types of
brain injury, short of death, result in states in which the
individual loses all ability to function and remains deeply
unresponsive. An individual who has suffered such a
severe brain injury may remain in a coma indefinitely.
This condition is termed persistent vegetative state.
Outcome from a coma is therefore quite variable and
depends a great deal on the cause and duration of the coma.
In the case of drug poisonings, extremely high rates of
recovery can be expected following prompt medical atten-
tion. Patients who have suffered head injuries tend to do
better than do patients whose coma was caused by other
types of medical illnesses. Leaving out those people whose
coma followed drug poisoning, only about 15% of patients
who remain in a coma for more than just a few hours make
a good recovery. Those adult patients who remain in a
coma for greater than four weeks have almost no chance of
eventually regaining their previous level of functioning. On
the other hand, children and young adults have regained
functioning even after two months in a coma.

None