The extraocular muscles attach via tendons to the
sclera (the white, opaque, outer protective covering of
the eyeball) at different places just behind an imaginary
equator circling the top, bottom, left, and right of the eye.
The other end of each of these muscles attaches to a part
of the orbit (the eye socket in the skull). These muscles
enable the eyes to move up, down, to one side or the
other, or any angle in between.
Normally both eyes move together, receive the same
image on corresponding locations on both retinas, and the
brain fuses these images into one three-dimensional
image. The exception is in strabismus which is a disorder
where one or both eyes deviate out of alignment, most
often outwardly (exotropia) or toward the nose
(esotropia). The brain now receives two different images,
and either suppresses one or the person sees double
(diplopia). This deviation can be adjusted by weakening
or strengthening the appropriate muscles to move the eyes
toward the center. For example, if an eye turns upward,
the muscle at the bottom of the eye could be strengthened.
Rarely, eye muscle surgery is performed on people
with nystagmus or Duane syndrome. Nystagmus is a con-
dition where one or both eyes move rapidly or oscillate; it
can sometimes be helped by moving the eyes to the posi-
tion of least oscillation. Duane syndrome is a disorder
where there is limited horizontal eye movement; it can
sometimes be relieved by surgery to weaken an eye muscle.
There are two methods to alter extraocular muscles.
Traditional surgery can be used to strengthen, weaken, or
reposition an extraocular muscle. The surgeon first
makes an incision in the conjunctiva (the clear membrane
covering the sclera), then puts a suture into the muscle to
prevent it from getting lost and loosens the muscle from
the eyeball with a surgical hook. During a resection, the
muscle is detached from the sclera, a piece of muscle is
removed so the muscle is now shorter, and the muscle is
reattached to the same place. This strengths the muscle.
In a recession, the muscle is made weaker by reposition-
ing it. More than one extraocular eye muscle might be
operated on at the same time.
Another way of weakening eye muscles, using botu-
linum toxin injected into the muscle, was introduced in
the early 1980s. Although the botulinum toxin wears off,
the realignment may be permanent, depending upon
whether neurological connections for binocular vision
were established during the time the toxin was active.
This technique can also be used to adjust a muscle after
traditional surgery.
The cost of eye muscle surgery is about $2,000–
$4,000, and about 700,000 surgeries are performed annu-
ally in the United States.

None