None

cells lining the nasal passages. Histamine increases
blood flow and causes the cells to swell. Antihistamines
are taken to relieve the symptoms of sneezing, runny
nose, itchy eyes, and congestion. Side effects are dry
mouth and drowsiness, especially with the first few
doses. Antihistamines should not be taken by people who
are driving or operating dangerous equipment. Some
people have allergic reactions to antihistamines. Com-
mon over-the-counter antihistamines include Chlor-
Trimeton, Dimetapp, Tavist, and Actifed. The generic
name for two common antihistamines are chlorpheni-
ramine and diphenhydramine.
Decongestants work to constrict the blood flow to
the vessels in the nose. This can shrink the tissue, reduce
congestion, and open inflamed nasal passages, making
breathing easier. Decongestants can make people feel jit-
tery or keep them from sleeping. They should not be used
by people with heart disease, high blood pressure, or
glaucoma. Some common decongestants are Neo-
Synepherine, Novafed, and Sudafed. The generic names
of common decongestants include phenylephrine,
phenylpropanolamine, pseudoephedrine, and in nasal
sprays naphazoline, oxymetazoline and xylometazoline.
Many over the counter medications are combina-
tions of both antihistamines and decongestants; an ache
and pain reliever, such as acetaminophen (Datril,
Tylenol, Panadol) or ibuprofen (Advil, Nuprin, Motrin,
Medipren); and a cough suppressant (dextromethor-
phan). Common combination medications include
Tylenol Cold and Flu, Triaminic, Sudafed Plus, and
Tavist D. Aspirin should not be given to children with a
cold because of its association with a risk of Reye’s syn-
drome, a serious disease.
Nasal sprays and nose drops are other products pro-
moted for reducing nasal congestion. These usually con-
tain a decongestant, but the decongestant can act more
quickly and strongly than ones found in pills or liquids
because it is applied directly in the nose. Congestion
returns after a few hours.
People can become dependent on nasal sprays and
nose drops. If used for a long time, users may suffer
withdrawal symptoms when these products are discon-
tinued. Nasal sprays and nose drops should not be used
for more than a few days. Check the label for recommen-
dations on length and frequency of use.
People react differently to different cold medications
and may find some more helpful than others. A medica-
tion may be effective initially, then lose some of its effec-
tiveness. Children sometimes react differently than
adults. Over-the-counter cold remedies should not be
given to infants without consulting a doctor first.
Care should be taken not to exceed the recommend-
ed dosages, especially when combination medications or
nasal sprays are taken. Individuals should determine
whether they wish to use any of these drugs. None of
them shorten or cure a cold. At best they help a person
feel more comfortable. People who are confused about
the drugs in any over-the-counter cold remedies should
ask their pharmacist for an explanation.
In addition to the optional use of over the counter
cold remedies, there are some self-care steps that people
can take to ease their discomfort. These include:
• drinking plenty of fluids, but avoiding acidic juices,
which may irritate the throat
• gargling with warm salt water—made by adding one
teaspoon of salt to 8 oz of water—for a sore throat
• not smoking
• getting plenty of rest
• using a cool-mist room humidifier to ease congestion
and sore throat
• rubbing Vaseline or other lubricant under the nose to
prevent irritation from frequent nose blowing
• for babies too young to blow their noses, the mucus
should be suctioned gently with an infant nasal aspira-
tor, it may be necessary to soften the mucus first with a
few drops of salt water