None

contact. Babies can be born infected with CMV, either
becoming infected in the uterus (congenital infection) or
during birth (from infected cervical secretions).
Like other herpes viruses, CMV remains inactive
(dormant) within the body for life after the initial infec-
tion. Some of the more serious types of CMV infections
occur in people who have been harboring the dormant
virus, only to have it reactivate when their immune sys-
tem is stressed. Immune systems may be weakened
because of cancer chemotherapy, medications given
after organ transplantation, or diseases that significantly
lower immune resistance like acquired immunodeficien-
cy syndrome (AIDS).
In a healthy person, initial CMV infection often
occurs without symptoms and is rarely noticed. Occa-
sionally, a first-time infection with CMV may cause a
mild illness called mononucleosis. Symptoms include
swollen glands, liver, and spleen; fever; increased white
blood cells; headache; fatigue; and sore throat. About
8% of all mononucleosis cases are due to CMV infec-
tion. A similar infection, though slightly more serious,
may occur two to four weeks after receiving a blood
transfusion containing CMV.
In people with weakened immune systems, CMV
infection can cause more serious and potentially life-
threatening illnesses. These illnesses include pneumo-
nia, and inflammations of the liver (hepatitis), brain
(encephalitis), esophagus (esophagitis), large intestine
(colitis), and retina of the eye (retinitis).
Babies who contract CMV from their mothers dur-
ing birth rarely develop any illness from these infections.
Infants born prematurely who become CMV infected
during birth have a greater chance of complications,
including pneumonia, hepatitis, and decreased blood
platelets.
However, an unborn baby is at great risk for seri-
ous problems when the mother becomes infected with
CMV for the first time while pregnant. About 10% of
these babies will be born with obvious problems,
including prematurity, lung problems, an enlarged
liver and spleen, jaundice, anemia, low birth weight,
small head size, and inflammation of the retina. About
90% of these babies may appear perfectly normal at
birth. Unfortunately, about 20% of these babies will
later develop severe hearing impairments and mental
retardation.