None

Everyone experiences feelings of unhappiness and
sadness occasionally. But when these depressed feel-
ings start to dominate everyday life and cause physical
and mental deterioration, they become what are known
as depressive disorders. Each year in the United
States, depressive disorders affect an estimated 17
million people at an approximate annual direct and
indirect cost of $53 billion. One in four women is like-
ly to experience an episode of severe depression in her
lifetime, with a 10–20% lifetime prevalence, com-
pared to 5–10% for men. The average age a first
depressive episode occurs is in the mid-20s, although
the disorder strikes all age groups indiscriminately,
from children to the elderly.
There are two main categories of depressive disor-
ders: major depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder.
Major depressive disorder is a moderate to severe
episode of depression lasting two or more weeks. Indi-
viduals experiencing this major depressive episode may
have trouble sleeping, lose interest in activities they once
took pleasure in, experience a change in weight, have dif-
ficulty concentrating, feel worthless and hopeless, or
have a preoccupation with death or suicide. In children,
the major depression may appear as irritability.
While major depressive episodes may be acute
(intense but short-lived), dysthymic disorder is an ongo-
ing, chronic depression that lasts two or more years (one
or more years in children) and has an average duration of
16 years. The mild to moderate depression of dysthymic
disorder may rise and fall in intensity, and those afflicted
with the disorder may experience some periods of nor-
mal, non-depressed mood of up to two months in length.
Its onset is gradual, and dysthymic patients may not be
able to pinpoint exactly when they started feeling
depressed. Individuals with dysthymic disorder may
experience a change in sleeping and eating patterns, low
self-esteem, fatigue, trouble concentrating, and feelings
of hopelessness.
Depression can also occur in bipolar disorder, an
affective mental illness that causes radical emotional
changes and mood swings, from manic highs to depres-
sive lows. The majority of bipolar individuals experience
alternating episodes of mania and depression.