Approximately 170 million people in the tropical and
subtropical areas of southeast Asia, South America, Africa,
and the islands of the Pacific are affected by this debilitat-
ing parasitic disease. While filariasis is rarely fatal, it is the
second leading cause of permanent and long-term disabili-
ty in the world. The World Health Organization (WHO)
has named filariasis one of only six “potentially eradica-
ble” infectious diseases and has embarked upon a 20-year
campaign to eradicate the disease.
In all cases, a mosquito first bites an infected indi-
vidual then bites another uninfected individual, transfer-
ring some of the worm larvae to the new host. Once with-
in the body, the larvae migrate to a particular part of the
body and mature to adult worms. Filariasis is classified
into three distinct types according to the part of the body
that becomes infected: lymphatic filariasis affects the cir-
culatory system that moves tissue fluid and immune cells
(lymphatic system); subcutaneous filariasis infects the
areas beneath the skin and whites of the eye; and serous
cavity filariasis infects body cavities but does not cause
disease. Several different types of worms can be respon-
sible for each type of filariasis, but the most common
species include the following: Wucheria bancrofti, Bru-
gia malayi (lymphatic filariasis), Onchocerca volvulus,
Loa loa, Mansonella streptocerca, Dracunculus medi-
nensis (subcutaneous filariasis), Mansonella pustans,
and Mansonella ozzardi (serous cavity filariasis).
The two most common types of the disease are Ban-
croftian and Malayan filariasis, both forms of lymphatic
filariasis. The Bancroftian variety is found throughout
Africa, southern and southeastern Asia, the Pacific
islands, and the tropical and subtropical regions of South
America and the Caribbean. Malayan filariasis occurs
only in southern and southeastern Asia. Filariasis is occa-
sionally found in the United States, especially among
immigrants from the Caribbean and Pacific islands.
A larvae matures into an adult worm within six
months to one year and can live between four and six
years. Each female worm can produce millions of larvae,
and these larvae only appear in the bloodstream at night,
when they may be transmitted, via an insect bite, to anoth-
er host. A single bite is usually not enough to acquire an
infection, therefore, short-term travelers are usually safe.
A series of multiple bites over a period of time is required
to establish an infection. As a result, those individuals who
are regularly active outdoors at night and those who spend
more time in remote jungle areas are at an increased risk
of contracting the filariasis infection.

None