Atherosclerosis—A process in which the walls of
the coronary arteries thicken due to the accumula-
tion of plaque in the blood vessels. Atherosclerosis
is the cause of coronary artery disease.
Angina—Chest pain that happens when diseased
blood vessels restrict the flow of blood to the
heart. Angina is often the first symptom of coro-
nary artery disease.
Beta-blocker—A drug that blocks some of the
effects of fight-or-flight hormone adrenaline (epi-
nephrine and norepinephrine), slowing the heart
rate and lowering the blood pressure.
Calcium-channel blocker—A drug that blocks the
entry of calcium into the muscle cells of small
blood vessels (arterioles) and keeps them from
narrowing.
Coronary arteries—The main arteries that provide
blood to the heart. The coronary arteries surround
the heart like a crown, coming out of the aorta,
arching down over the top of the heart, and divid-
ing into two branches. These are the arteries in
which coronary artery disease occurs.
HDL cholesterol—High-density lipoprotein cho-
lesterol is a component of cholesterol that helps
protect against heart disease. HDL is nicknamed
“good” cholesterol
LDL Cholesterol—Low-density lipoprotein choles-
terol is the primary cholesterol molecule. High
levels of LDL increase the risk of coronary heart
disease. LDL is nicknamed “bad” cholesterol.
Plaque—A deposit of fatty and other substances
that accumulate in the lining of the artery wall.
Triglyceride—A fat that comes from food or is
made from other energy sources in the body. Ele-
vated triglyceride levels contribute to the develop-
ment of atherosclerosis.
usually called coronary angioplasty, is a non-surgical
procedure. A catheter tipped with a balloon is threaded
from a blood vessel in the thigh into the blocked artery.
The balloon is inflated, compressing the plaque to
enlarge the blood vessel and open the blocked artery. The
balloon is deflated, and the catheter is removed. Coro-
nary angioplasty is performed by a cardiologist in a hos-
pital and generally requires a stay of one or two days.
Coronary angioplasty is successful about 90% of the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
931

None