Bile—A bitter yellow-green substance produced by
the liver. Bile breaks down fats in the small intestine
so that they can be used by the body. It is stored in
the gallbladder and passes from the gallbladder
through the common bile duct to the top of the
small intestine (duodenum) as needed to digest fat.
Biliary—Of bile or of the gallbladder and bile ducts
that transport bile and make up the biliary system or
tract.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography—
A diagnostic procedure for mapping the pancreatic
and common bile ducts. A flexible tube with a light
transmitter (fiberoptics) is placed in the duct. A con-
trast dye is instilled directly into the duct and a series
of x-ray images are taken.
Computed tomography scans (CT)—An imaging
technique in which cross-sectional x rays of the
body are compiled to create a three-dimensional
image of the body’s internal structures.
Hepatic—Of the liver, from the Greek hepar.
Liver function tests—Tests used to evaluate liver
metabolism, storage, filtration, and excretion. The
tests include alkaline phosphatase and serum alanine
aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—An imaging
technique that uses a large circular magnet and
radio waves to generate signals from atoms in the
body. These signals are used to construct images of
internal structures.
Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography—An x-
ray examination of the bile ducts. A needle is
passed through the skin (percutaneous) across or
over the liver (transhepatic) and directly into a bile
duct to inject a contrast dye. The dye enhances the
x-ray image mapping the system of bile ducts
(cholangiography).
Phenothiazine-derivative drugs—A large family of
drugs derived from phenothiazine, a compound
that in itself is too poisonous for human consump-
tion. Phenothiazine derivatives include tranquiliz-
ers, medications that prevent vomiting, antihista-
mines, and drugs used to enhance the effectiveness
of anesthesia.
Ultrasonography—A test using sound waves to
measure blood flow. Gel is applied to a hand-held
transducer that is pressed against the patient’s body.
Images are displayed on a monitor.

None