None

of dementia may be treated with a com-
bination of psychotherapy, environmental modifications,
and medication. Drug therapy can be complicated by for-
getfulness, especially if the prescribed drug must be
taken several times daily.
Behavioral approaches may be used to reduce the
frequency or severity of problem behaviors, such as
aggression or socially inappropriate conduct. Problem
behavior may be a reaction to frustration or overstimula-
tion; understanding and modifying the situations that
trigger it can be effective. Strategies may include break-
ing down complex tasks, such as dressing or feeding,
into simpler steps, or reducing the amount of activity in
the environment to avoid confusion and agitation. Plea-
surable activities, such as crafts, games, and music, can
provide therapeutic stimulation and improve mood.
Modifying the environment can increase safety and
comfort while decreasing agitation. Home modifications
for safety include removal or lock-up of hazards such as
sharp knives, dangerous chemicals, and tools. Child-
proof latches or Dutch doors may be used to limit access
as well. Lowering the hot water temperature to 120°F
(48.9°C) or less reduces the risk of scalding. Bed rails
and bathroom safety rails can be important safety mea-
sures, as well. Confusion may be reduced with simpler
decorative schemes and presence of familiar objects.
Covering or disguising doors (with a mural, for example)
may reduce the tendency to wander. Positioning the bed
in view of the bathroom can decrease incontinence.
Two drugs, tacrine (Cognex) and donepezil (Ari-
cept), are commonly prescribed for AD. These drugs
inhibit the breakdown of acetylcholine in the brain, pro-
longing its ability to conduct chemical messages between
brain cells. They provide temporary improvement in cog-
nitive functions for about 40% of patients with mild to
moderate AD. Hydergine is sometimes prescribed as
well, though it is of questionable benefit for most
patients.
Psychotic symptoms, including paranoia, delusions,
and hallucinations, may be treated with antipsychotic
drugs, such as haloperidol, chlorpromazine, risperidone,
and clozapine. Side effects of these drugs can be signifi-
cant. Antianxiety drugs such as Valium may improve
behavioral symptoms, especially agitation and anxiety,
although BuSpar has fewer side effects. The anticonvul-
sant carbamazepine is also sometimes prescribed for agi-
tation. Depression is treated with antidepressants, usually
beginning with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) such as Prozac or Paxil,
followed by
monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepres-
sants. Electroconvulsive therapy may be appropriate for
some patients with severe depression who are unrespon-
sive to drug therapy. In general, medications should be
administered very cautiously to demented patients, in the
lowest possible effective doses, to minimize side effects.
Supervision of taking medications is generally required.
Long-term institutional care may be needed for the
person with dementia, as profound cognitive losses often
precede death by a number of years. Early planning for
the financial burden of nursing home care is critical. Use-
ful information about financial planning for long-term
care is available through the Alzheimer’s Association.
Family members or others caring for a person with
dementia are often subject to extreme stress, and may
develop feelings of anger, resentment, guilt, and hopeless-
ness, in addition to the sorrow they feel for their loved one
and for themselves. Depression is an extremely common
consequence of being a full-time caregiver for a person
with dementia. Support groups can be an important way
to deal with the stress of caregiving. The location and
contact numbers for caregiver support groups are avail-
able from the Alzheimer’s Association; they may also be
available through a local social service agency or the
patient’s physician. Medical treatment for depression may
be an important adjunct to group support.