None

The only definitive treatment for FAP is surgical
removal of the lower intestine. Since the goal is to pre-
vent cancer, the operation is done as soon as adenoma-
tous polyps are found on sigmoidoscopy. Waiting until a
polyp becomes malignant is unsafe, as the cancer may
invade surrounding tissues.
There are several choices about the type of surgery to
treat this condition. Some authorities advocate removal of
the colon, leaving the rectum or lowest portion of the
intestine in place. The small intestine can be attached to
the rectum, allowing normal bowel function. This is often
called ileorectal anastomosis. Others argue that this sec-
tion is also liable to develop polyps, needs to be moni-
tored regularly, and may require eventual removal.
Excision of the entire lower intestine with preserva-
tion of normal bowel function is possible. This entails a
more complex surgical procedure. The patient may expe-
rience more complications and a longer recovery period.
However, the risk of polyp development in this area is
very low. Periodic examination of the intestine may not
be needed once healing is complete.
The more intricate surgery may be referred to as a J-
pouch procedure, an ileal pouch-anal anastomosis, a
restorative proctocolectomy, or an ileoanal reservoir proce-
dure. It involves creating a “pouch” of tissue from the small
intestine, which is attached to the anus. This serves as a
reservoir or holding area for stool, much as the rectum does
normally. The surgery is often done in several stages. A
temporary ileostomy, which creates an opening of the small
intestines onto the abdomen, is required. When all proce-
dures are completed, and after a recuperation period, the
patient regains normal bowel function through the anus.
Some researchers suggest that as genetic testing
becomes more developed, the specific portion of the
gene involved may dictate the type of surgery chosen.
Those at high risk of developing rectal polyps may be
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1286