flow occurs in 70–90% of women and is thought to be
more common in women with endometriosis. However,
many women with reversed menstrual flow do not
develop endometriosis.
• Vascular-lymphatic theory. This theory suggests that
the lymph system or blood vessels (vascular system) is
the vehicle for the distribution of endometrial cells out
of the uterus.
• Coelomic metaplasia theory. According to this hypothe-
sis, remnants of tissue left over from prenatal develop-
ment of the woman’s reproductive tract transforms into
endometrial cells throughout the body.
• Induction theory. This explanation postulates that an
unidentified substance found in the body forces cells
from the lining of the body cavity to change into
endometrial cells.
In addition to these theories, the following factors are
thought to influence the development of endometriosis:
• Heredity. A woman’s chance of developing endometrio-
sis is seven times greater if her mother or sisters have
the disease.
• Immune system function. Women with endometriosis
may have lower functioning immune systems that have
trouble eliminating stray endometrial cells. This would
explain why a high percentage of women experience
reversed menstrual flow while relatively few develop
endometriosis.
• Dioxin exposure. Some research suggests a link
between the exposure to dioxin (TCCD), a toxic chemi-
cal found in weed killers, and the development of
endometriosis.
While many women with endometriosis suffer debil-
itating symptoms, others have the disease without know-
ing it. Paradoxically, there does not seem to be any rela-
tion between the severity of the symptoms and the extent
of the disease. The most common symptoms are:
• Menstrual pain. Pain in the lower abdomen that begins
a day or two before the menstrual period starts and con-
tinues through to the end is typical of endometriosis.
Some women also report lower back aches and pain
during urination and bowel movement, especially dur-
ing their periods.
• Painful sexual intercourse. Pressure on the vagina and
cervix causes severe pain for some women.
• Abnormal bleeding. Heavy menstrual periods, irregular
bleeding, and spotting are common features of
endometriosis.
• Infertility. There is a strong association between
endometriosis and infertility, although the reasons for
this have not been fully explained. It is thought that
the build up of scar tissue and adhesions blocks the
fallopian tubes and prevents the ovaries from releasing
eggs. Endometriosis may also affect fertility by caus-
ing hormonal irregularities and a higher rate of early
miscarriage.

None