None

Accidental drug overdose may be the result of mis-
use of prescription medicines or commonly used medica-
tions like pain relievers and cold remedies. Symptoms
differ depending on the drug taken. Some of the drugs
commonly involved in overdoses are listed below along
with symptoms and outcomes.
Acetaminophen is the generic name for the com-
monly used pain reliever Tylenol. Overdose of this drug
causes liver damage with symptoms that include loss of
appetite, tiredness, nausea and vomiting, paleness, and
sweating. The next stage of symptoms indicates liver
failure and includes abdominal pain and tenderness,
swelling of the liver, and abnormal blood tests for liver
enzymes. In the last stage of this poisoning, liver failure
advances and the patient becomes jaundiced, with yel-
lowing of the skin and whites of the eyes. They may also
experience kidney failure, bleeding disorders, and
encephalopathy (swelling of the brain).
Anticholinergic drugs (drugs that block the action of
acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter) like atropine, scopo-
lamine, belladonna, antihistamines, and antipsychotic
agents cause the skin and moist tissues (like in the mouth
and nose) to become dry and flushed. Dilated pupils, an
inability to urinate, and mental disturbances are also
symptoms. Severe toxicity can lead to seizures, abnormal
heart rhythms, extremely high blood pressure, and coma.
Antidepressant drugs like amitriptyline, desi-
pramine, and nortriptyline can cause irregular heart rate,
vomiting, low blood pressure, confusion, and seizures. An
overdose of antidepressants also causes symptoms similar
to those seen with anticholinergic drug overdoses.
Cholinergic drugs (drugs that stimulate the
parasympathetic nervous system) like carbamate and
pilocarpine cause nausea, diarrhea, increased secretion
of body fluids (sweat, tears, saliva, and urine), fatigue,
and muscle weakness. Convulsions are possible. Death
can occur due to respiratory failure and heart failure.
Cocaine and crack cocaine overdoses cause seizures,
high blood pressure, increased heart rate, paranoia, and
other changes in behavior. Heart attack or stroke are
serious risks within three days after cocaine overdose.
Depressant drugs (tranquilizers, antianxiety drugs,
sleeping pills) cause sleepiness, slowed or slurred speech,
difficulty walking or standing, blurred vision, impaired
ability to think, disorientation, and mood changes. Over-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1104