None

Cleansing enemas act by stimulation of bowel activ-
ity through irritation of the lower bowel, and by disten-
tion with the volume of fluid instilled. When the enema
is administered, the individual is usually lying on the left
side, which places the sigmoid colon (lower portion of
bowel) below the rectum and facilitates infusion of fluid.
The length of time it takes to administer an enema
depends on the amount of fluid to be infused. The
amount of fluid administered will vary depending on the
age and size of the person receiving the enema, however
general guidelines would be:
• Infant: 250 cc or less
• Toddler and preschooler: 500 cc or less
• School-aged child: 500–1,000 cc
• Adult: 750–1,000 cc
Some may differentiate between high and low ene-
mas. A high enema, given to cleanse as much of the large
bowel as possible, is usually administered at higher pres-
sure and with larger volume (1,000 cc), and the individ-
ual changes position several times in order for the fluid
to flow up into the bowel. A low enema, intended to
cleanse only the lower bowel, is administered at lower
pressure, using about 500 cc of fluid.
Oil retention enemas serve to lubricate the rectum
and lower bowel, and soften the stool. For adults, about
150–200 cc of oil is instilled, while in small children,
75–150 cc of oil is considered adequate. Salad oil or liq-
uid petrolatum are commonly used at a temperature of
91°F (32.8°C). There are also commercially prepared oil
retention enemas. The oil is usually retained for one to
three hours before it is expelled.
The rectal tube used for infusion of the solution,
usually made of rubber or plastic, has two or more
openings at the end through which the solution can flow
into the bowel. The distance to which the tube must be
inserted is dependent upon the age and size of the
patient. For adult, insertion is usually 3–4 in (7.5–10
cm); for children, approximately 2–3 in (5–7.5 cm); and
for infants, only 1–1.5 in (2.5–3.75 cm). The rectal tube
is lubricated before insertion with a water soluble lubri-
cant to ease insertion and decrease irritation to the rec-
tal tissues.
The higher the container of solution is placed, the
greater the force in which the fluid flows into the patient.
Routinely, the container should be no higher than 12 in
(30 cm) above the level of the bed; for a high cleansing
enema, the container may be 12–18 in (30–45 cm) above
the bed level, because the fluid is to be instilled higher
into the bowel.