limited skin involvement can successfully treat themselves at home with special lamps and no psoralen. The next stage, IIB, involves one or more cutaneous tumors, in combination with absent or present palpable lymph nodes, lymph uninvolved, reactive, or dermatopath- ic, and no visceral involvement (T3, LN0-2, M0). Stage III is characterized by erythroderma, an abnormal redness over widespread areas of the skin (T4, LN0-2, M0). For more extensive disease, radiation therapy is an effective treatment option. It is generally used after the topical treatments have proven ineffective. Individual plaques or tumors can be treated using electrons, ortho- voltage x rays, or megavoltage photons with exposure in the range of 15 to 25 Gy. Photon therapy has proven par- ticularly useful once the lymph nodes are involved. Anoth- GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 976 Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma er possibility is total-skin electron beam therapy (TSEB), although the availability of this treatment method is limit- ed. It involves irradiation of the entire body with energized electrons. Side effects of this treatment include loss of fin- ger and toe nails, acute redness of the skin, and inability to sweat for about six to 12 months after therapy. Almost all patients respond favorably to radiation treatment and any reoccurrence is usually much less severe. Combinations of different types of treatments is a very common approach to the management of CTCL. Topical nitrogen mustard or PUVA is often used after completion of radiation treatment to prolong the effects. The addition of genetically engineered interferon to PUVA therapy sig- nificantly increases the percentage of patients showing a complete response. Furthermore, although treatments using chemotherapy drugs alone, such as deoxycofomycin or etretinate, have been disappointing for CTCL, combining these drugs with interferon has shown promising results. Interferon has also been combined with retinoid treatments, although the mechanism of action of retinoids (Vitamin A analogues) against CTCL is unknown. The final two stages of the disease are IVA and IVB. IVA presents as any amount of skin involvement, absent or present palpable lymph nodes, no visceral involve- ment, and lymph that contains large clusters of convolut- ed cells or obliterated nodes (T1-4, LN3-4). IVB differs in the addition of palpable lymph nodes and visceral involvement (T1-4, LN3-4, M1). All of the treatment methods described above are appropriate for the final two stages of the disease. None