None

Alexander technique—A technique developed by
Frederick Alexander that focuses on the variations
in body posture, muscles, and breathing. Defects in
these functions can lead to stress, nervous tension
or possible loss of function.
Bone spur—Also called an osteophyte, it is an out-
growth or ridge that forms on a bone.
Cervical—Referring to structures within the neck.
Computed tomography myelography—This med-
ical procedure combines aspects of computed
tomography scanning and plain-film myelography.
A CT scan is an imaging technique in which cross-
sectional x rays of the body are compiled to create a
three-dimensional image of the body’s internal
structures. Myelography involves injecting a water-
soluble substance into the area around the spine to
make it visible on x rays. In computed tomography
myelography or CT myelography, the water-soluble
substance is injected, but the imaging is done with
a CT scan.
Disk—A ringlike structure that fits between the ver-
tebrae in the spine to protect the bones, nerves, and
blood vessels. The outer layer is a tough, fibrous tis-
sue, and the inner core is composed of more elastic
tissue.
Feldenkrais method—A therapy based on creating a
good self image by correction and improvements of
body movements.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—An imaging
technique that uses a large circular magnet and
radio waves to generate signals from atoms in the
body. These signals are used to construct images of
internal structures.
Myelopathy—A disorder in which the tissue of the
spinal cord is diseased or damaged.
Orthosis—An external device, such as a splint or a
brace, that prevents or assists movement.
Osteophyte—Also referred to as bone spur, it is an
outgrowth or ridge that forms on a bone.
Radiculopathy—Sometimes referred to as a
pinched nerve, it refers to compression of the nerve
root—the part of a nerve between vertebrae. This
compression causes pain to be perceived in areas to
which the nerve leads.
Spine—A term for the backbone that includes the
vertebrae, disks, and spinal cord as a whole.
Stenosis—A condition in which a canal or other
passageway in the body is constricted.
Traction—A medical treatment that exerts a pulling
or extending force. Used for cervical problems, it
relieves pressure on structures between the verte-
brae and muscular tension.
Vertebrae—The ringlike component bones of the
spine.
efits include that it takes less time to perform and tends to
be less expensive than an MRI. A good diagnosis may be
reached with either a computed tomography myelography
or an MRI, but sometimes complementary information
from both tests is necessary. Nerve conduction velocity,
electromyogram (EMG), and/or somatosensory evoked
potential testing may help to confirm which nerve roots
are involved.