During the first phase of labor, the cervix dilates
(opens) from 0–10 cm. This phase has an early, or latent,
phase and an active phase. During the latent phase,
progress is usually very slow. It may take quite a while
and many contractions before the cervix dilates the first
few centimeters. Contractions increase in strength as
labor progresses. Most women are relatively comfortable
during the latent phase and walking around is encour-
aged, since it naturally stimulates the process.
As labor begins, the muscular wall of the uterus
begins to contract as the cervix relaxes and expands. As a
portion of the amniotic sac surrounding the baby is pushed
into the opening, it bursts under the pressure, releasing
amniotic fluid. This is called “breaking the bag of waters.”
During a contraction, the infant experiences intense
pressure that pushes it against the cervix, eventually forc-
ing the cervix to stretch open. At the same time, the con-
tractions cause the cervix to thin. During this first stage, a
woman’s contractions occur more and more often and last
longer and longer. The doctor or nurse will do a periodic
pelvic exam to determine how the mother is progressing.
If the contractions aren’t forceful enough to open the
cervix, a drug may be given to make the uterus contract.
As pain and discomfort increase, women may be
tempted to request pain medication. If possible, though,
administration of pain medication or anesthetics should
be delayed until the active phase of labor begins—at
which point the medication will not act to slow down or
stop the labor.
The active stage of labor is faster and more efficient
than the latent phase. In this phase, contractions are
longer and more regular, usually occurring about every
two minutes. These stronger contractions are also more
painful. Women who use the breathing exercises learned
in childbirth classes find that these can help cope with
the pain experienced during this phase. Many women
also receive some pain medication at this point—either a
short-term medication, such as Nubain or Numorphan, or
an epidural anesthesia.
As the cervix dilates to 8–9 cm, the phase called the
transition begins. This refers to the transition from the
first phase (during which the cervix dilates from 0–10
cm) and the second phase (during which the baby is
pushed out through the birth canal). As the baby’s head
begins to descend, women begin to feel the urge to
“push” or bear down. Active pushing by the mother
should not begin until the second phase, since pushing
too early can cause the cervix to swell or to tear and
bleed. The attending healthcare practitioner should coun-
sel the mother on when to begin to push.

None