Aspirator—A medical instrument that uses suction
to withdraw fluids from the lungs, digestive tract, or
other parts of the body for laboratory testing.
Asymptomatic—Persons who carry a disease and
are usually capable of transmitting the disease but,
who do not exhibit symptoms of the disease are
said to be asymptomatic.
Cercaria (plural, cercariae)—An intermediate-stage of
the fluke larva, released into water by infected snails.
Cross-reaction—A reaction that occurs in blood
testing when a disease agent reacts to the specific
antibody for another disease agent. Cross-reactions
are common in blood tests for fluke infections
because the different species are closely related.
Encysted—Enclosed in a cyst or capsule. Flukes
spend part of their life cycle as encysted larvae.
Fluke—A parasitic flatworm that has external suck-
ers. Flukes are sometimes called trematodes.
Host—The living animal that supplies nutrition to a
parasite.
Jaundice—Yellowing of the skin and the whites of
the eyes as a result of excess bile in the blood due
to an improperly functioning liver.
Metacercaria (plural, metacercariae)—The encyst-
ed stage of a fluke larva that produces infection in
human beings.
Miracidium (plural, miracidia)—The free-swim-
ming larval form in the life cycle of the liver fluke.
Parasite—An organism that lives on or inside an
animal of a different species and feeds on it or
draws nutrients from it.
Trematode—Parasitic flatworms or another name
for fluke, taken from a Greek word that means hav-
ing holes.
beginning of the infection and the appearance of the eggs
during coughing is about six weeks. Patients with lung
infections may have chest pain and fever as well as rust-
colored or bloody sputum. Lung infections can lead to
lung abscess, pneumonia, or bronchitis. Patients with
fluke infections of the brain may experience seizures or a
fatal inflammation of brain tissue called encephalitis.
Some patients also develop diarrhea and abdominal pain
or lumps under the skin that contain adult flukes.

None