Dilation and curettage (D & C)—A procedure
performed under anesthesia during which the
cervix is dilated, and tissue lining the uterus is
scraped out with a metal spoon-shaped instrument
or a suction tube. The procedure can be either
diagnostic, or to remove polyps.
Endometrial biopsy—The removal of tissue either
by suction or scraping of samples of tissue from
the uterus. The cervix is not dilated. The procedure
has a lower rate of diagnostic accuracy than a D &
C, but can be done as an office procedure under
local anesthesia.
Endometrial cancer—Cancer of the inner mucous
membrane of the uterus.
Fibroids, or fibroid tumors—Fibroid tumors are
non-cancerous (benign) growths in the uterus.
They occur in 30–40% of women over age 40,
and do not need to be removed unless they are
causing symptoms that interfere with a woman’s
normal activities.
Hypothyroidism—A disorder in which the thyroid
gland produces too little thyroid hormone causing
a decrease in the rate of metabolism with associat-
ed effects on the reproductive system.
Lupus erythematosus—A chronic inflammatory
disease in which inappropriate immune system
reactions cause abnormalities in the blood vessels
and connective tissue.
Progesterone—A hormone naturally secreted by
the ovary, or manufactured synthetically, that
prepares the uterus for implantation of a fertil-
ized egg.
Prostaglandins—A group of chemicals that medi-
ate, or determine the actions of other chemicals in
the cell or body.
Otherwise the goal of treatment is to relieve the symp-
toms to a degree that uterine bleeding does not interfere
with a woman’s normal activities or cause anemia.
Generally the first approach to controlling DUB is to
use oral contraceptives that provide a balance between
the hormones estrogen and progesterone. Oral contracep-
tives are often very effective in adolescents and young
women in their twenties. NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs), like Naprosyn and Motrin, are
also used to treat DUB.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1113

None