None

Seeing a physician regularly while taking calcium
channel blockers is important. The physician will check
to make certain the medicine is working as it should and
will watch for unwanted side effects. People who have
high blood pressure often feel perfectly fine. However,
they should continue to see their prescribing physician
even when they feel well so that he can keep a close
watch on their condition. They should also continue to
take their medicine even when they feel fine.
Calcium channel blockers will not cure high blood
pressure, but will help to control the condition. To avoid
the serious health problems associated with high blood
pressure, patients may have to take this type of medica-
tion for the rest of their lives. Furthermore, the blockers
alone may not be enough. People with high blood pres-
sure may also need to avoid certain foods and keep their
weight under control. The health care professional who
is treating the condition can offer advice as to what mea-
sures may be necessary. Patients being treated for high
blood pressure should not change their diets without
consulting their physicians.
Anyone taking calcium channel blockers for high
blood pressure should not take any other prescription or
over-the-counter medication without first checking with
the prescribing physician, as some of these drugs may
increase blood pressure.
Some people feel drowsy or less alert than usual
when taking calcium channel blockers. Anyone who
takes these drugs should not drive, use machines, or do
anything else that might be dangerous until they have
found out how the drugs affect them.
People who normally have chest pain when they
exercise or exert themselves may not have the pain when
they are taking calcium channel blockers. This could lead
them to be more active than they should be. Anyone tak-
ing calcium channel blockers should therefore consult
with the prescribing physician concerning how much
exercise and activity may be considered safe.
Some people get headaches that last for a short time
after taking a dose of this medication. This problem usu-
ally goes away during the course of treatment. If it does
not, or if the headaches are severe, the prescribing physi-
cian should be informed.
Patients taking certain calcium channel blockers
may need to check their pulse regularly, as the drugs may
slow the pulse too much. If the pulse is too slow, circula-
tion problems may result. The prescribing physician can
show patients the correct way to check their pulse.
This type of medication may cause the gums to
swell, bleed, or become tender. If this problem occurs, a
medical physician or dentist should be consulted. To help
prevent the problem, care should be taken when brushing
and flossing the teeth. Regular dental check-ups and
cleanings are also recommended.
Older people may be unusually sensitive to the
effects of calcium channel blockers. This may increase
the chance of side effects.