• flat bridge of the nose
• smaller than normal, low-set nose
• small mouth, which causes the tongue to stick out and
to appear overly large
• upward slanting eyes
• extra folds of skin located at the inside corner of each
eye, near the nose (called epicanthal folds)
• rounded cheeks
• small, misshapen ears
• small, wide hands
• an unusual, deep crease across the center of the palm
(called a simian crease)
• a malformed fifth finger
• a wide space between the big and the second toes
• unusual creases on the soles of the feet
• overly-flexible joints (sometimes referred to as being
double-jointed)
• ahorter than normal height
Other types of defects often accompany Down syn-
drome. About 30–50% of all children with Down syn-
drome are found to have heart defects. A number of dif-
ferent heart defects are common in Down syndrome,
including abnormal openings (holes) in the walls that
separate the heart’s chambers (atrial septal defect, ven-
tricular septal defect). These result in abnormal patterns
of blood flow within the heart. The abnormal blood flow
often means that less oxygen is sent into circulation
throughout the body. Another heart defect that occurs in
Down syndrome is called Tetralogy of Fallot. Tetralogy
of Fallot consists of a hole in the heart, along with three
other major heart defects.
Malformations of the gastrointestinal tract are pre-
sent in about 5–7% of children with Down syndrome.
The most common malformation is a narrowed, obstruct-
ed duodenum (the part of the intestine into which the
stomach empties). This disorder, called duodenal atresia,
interferes with the baby’s milk or formula leaving the
stomach and entering the intestine for digestion. The
baby often vomits forcibly after feeding, and cannot gain
weight appropriately until the defect is repaired.
Other medical conditions that occur in patients with
Down syndrome include an increased chance of develop-
ing infections, especially ear infections and pneumonia;
certain kidney disorders; thyroid disease (especially low
or hypothyroid); hearing loss; vision impairment requir-
ing glasses (corrective lenses); and a 20-times greater
chance of developing leukemia (a blood disorder).
Development in a baby and child with Down syn-
drome occurs at a much slower than normal rate.
Because of weak, floppy muscles (hypotonia), babies
learn to sit up, crawl, and walk much later than their nor-
mal peers. Talking is also quite delayed. The level of
mental retardation is considered to be mild-to-moderate
in Down syndrome. The actual IQ range of Down syn-
drome children is quite varied, but the majority of such
children are in what is sometimes known as the trainable
range. This means that most people with Down syn-
drome can be trained to do regular self-care tasks, func-
tion in a socially appropriate manner in a normal home
environment, and even hold simple jobs.
As people with Down syndrome age, they face an
increased chance of developing the brain disease called
Alzheimer’s (sometimes referred to as dementia or
senility). Most people have a six in 100 risk of develop-
ing Alzheimer’s, but people with Down syndrome have a
25 in 100 chance of the disease. Alzheimer’s disease
causes the brain to shrink and to break down. The num-
ber of brain cells decreases, and abnormal deposits and
structural arrangements occur. This process results in a
loss of brain functioning. People with Alzheimer’s have
strikingly faulty memories. Over time, people with
Alzheimer’s disease will lapse into an increasingly unre-
sponsive state. Some researchers have shown that even
Down syndrome patients who do not appear to have
Alzheimer’s disease have the same changes occurring to
the structures and cells of their brains.
As people with Down syndrome age, they also have
an increased chance of developing a number of other ill-
nesses, including cataracts, thyroid problems, diabetes,
and seizure disorders.

None