None

Spinal manipulation has a long history in many cul-
tures but Daniel D. Palmer is the founder of modern chi-
ropractic theory, dating back to the 1890s. A grocer and
magnetic healer, he applied his knowledge of the nervous
system and manual therapies in an unusual situation. One
renowned story concerns Harvey Lillard, a janitor in the
office where Palmer worked. The man had been deaf for
17 years, ever since he had sustained an injury to his
upper spine. Palmer performed an adjustment on a painful
vertebra in the region of the injury and Lillard’s hearing
was reputedly restored. Palmer theorized that all commu-
nication from the brain to the rest of the body passes
through the spinal canal, and areas that are poorly aligned
or under stress can cause physical symptoms both in the
spine and in other areas of the body. Thus the body has
the innate intelligence to heal itself when unencumbered
by spinal irregularities causing nerve interference. After
his success with Lillard, other patients began coming to
him for care, and responded well to adjustments. This
resulted in Palmer’s further study of the relationship
between an optimally functional spine and normal health.
Palmer founded the first chiropractic college in
1897. His son, B. J. Palmer, continued to develop chiro-
practic philosophy and practice after his father’s death.
B. J. and other faculty members were divided over the
role of subluxation in disease. B. J. saw it as the cause of
all disease. The others disagreed and sought a more ratio-
nal way of thinking, thus broadening the base of chiro-
practic education. From 1910–1920, many other chiro-
practic colleges were established. Other innovators,
including John Howard, Carl Cleveland, Earl Home-
wood, Joseph Janse, Herbert Lee, and Claude Watkins,
also helped to advance the profession.
The theories of the Palmers receive somewhat
broader interpretation today. Many chiropractors believe
that back pain can be relieved and health restored
through chiropractic treatment even in patients who do
not have demonstrable subluxations. Scientific develop-
ment and research of chiropractic is gaining momentum.
The twenty-first century will likely see the metaphysical
concepts such as innate intelligence give way to more
scientific proofs and reform.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
767