None

Adenocarcinoma—Type of cancer beginning in
glandular epithelium.
Adjuvant therapy—Treatment involving radiation,
chemotherapy (drug treatment), or hormone thera-
py, or a combination of all three given after the pri-
mary treatment for the possibility of residual micro-
scopic disease.
Anastomosis—Surgical reconnection of the ends of
the bowel after removal of a portion of the bowel.
Anemia—The condition caused by too few circulat-
ing red blood cells, often manifested in part by
fatigue.
Carcinogens—Substances in the environment that
cause cancer, presumably by inducing mutations,
with prolonged exposure.
Electrolytes—Salts, such as sodium and chloride.
Epithelium—Cells composing the lining of an
organ.
Lymphatics—Channels that are conduits for lymph.
Lymph nodes—Cellular filters through which lym-
phatics flow.
Malignant—Cells that have been altered such that
they have lost normal control mechanisms and are
capable of local invasion and spread to other areas
of the body.
Metastasis—Site of invasive tumor growth that orig-
inated from a malignancy elsewhere in the body.
Mutation—A change in the genetic makeup of a
cell that may occur spontaneously or be environ-
mentally induced.
Occult blood—Presence of blood that cannot be
seen with the naked eye.
Polyps—Localized growths of the epithelium that
can be benign, precancerous, or harbor malig-
nancy.
Radical resection—Surgical resection that takes the
blood supply and lymph system supplying the
organ along with the organ.
Resect—To remove surgically.
Sacrum—Posterior bony wall of the pelvis.
Systemic—Referring to throughout the body.
• Stage IV: any of previous criteria associated with dis-
tant metastasis.
With many cancers other than colon cancer, staging
plays an important pre-treatment role to best determine
treatment options. In colon cancer, almost all colon can-
cers are treated with surgery first, regardless of stage.
Colon cancers through stage III, and even some stage IV
colon cancers, are treated with surgery first before any
other treatments are considered.