Doppler effect—The principle that the sound of
an object moving toward you has a higher pitch
than the sound when it’s moving away from you.
Transducer—The part of a machine that changes
signals in one form into another form.
Ultrasound—Sound that is too high for the human
ear to hear.
event is referred to as nondisjunction. When this defec-
tive cell is involved in the conception of a baby, that baby
will have a total of 47 chromosomes. The extra chromo-
some in Down syndrome is labeled number 21. For this
reason, the existence of three such chromosomes is
sometimes referred to as Trisomy 21.
In a very rare number of Down syndrome cases
(about 1–2%), the original egg and sperm cells are com-
pletely normal. The problem occurs sometime shortly
after fertilization; during the phase where cells are divid-
ing rapidly. One cell divides abnormally, creating a line
of cells with an extra chromosome 21. This form of
genetic disorder is called a mosaic. The individual with
this type of Down syndrome has two types of cells: those
with 46 chromosomes (the normal number), and those
with 47 chromosomes (as occurs in Down syndrome).
Some researchers have suggested that individuals with
this type of mosaic form of Down syndrome have less
severe signs and symptoms of the disorder.
Another relatively rare genetic accident which can
cause Down syndrome is called translocation. During cell
division, the number 21 chromosome somehow breaks. A
piece of the 21 chromosome then becomes attached to
another chromosome. Each cell still has 46 chromosomes,
but the extra piece of chromosome 21 results in the signs
and symptoms of Down syndrome. Translocations occur
in about 3–4% of cases of Down syndrome.
Down syndrome occurs in about one in every
800–1,000 births. It affects an equal number of boys and
girls. Less than 25% of Down syndrome cases occur due
to an extra chromosome in the sperm cell. The majority
of cases of Down syndrome occur due to an extra chro-
mosome 21 within the egg cell supplied by the mother
(nondisjunction). As a woman’s age (maternal age)
increases, the risk of having a Down syndrome baby
increases significantly. For example, at younger ages, the
risk is about one in 4,000. By the time the woman is age
35, the risk increases to one in 400; by age 40 the risk
increases to one in 110; and by age 45 the risk becomes
one in 35. There is no increased risk of either mosaicism
or translocation with increased maternal age.

None