None

Amniocentesis—A procedure in which a needle is
inserted through a pregnant woman’s abdomen and
into her uterus to withdraw a small sample of amni-
otic fluid. The amniotic fluid can be examined for
sign of disease or other problems afflicting the fetus.
Amniotic fluid—The fluid that surrounds a fetus in
the uterus.
Anemia—A condition in which there is an abnor-
mally low number of red blood cells in the blood-
stream. Major symptoms are paleness, shortness of
breath, unusually fast or strong heart beats, and
tiredness.
Antibody—A protein molecule produced by the
immune system in response to a protein that is not
recognized as belonging in the body.
Antigen—A protein that can elicit an immune
response in the form of antibody formation. With
regard to red blood cells, the major antigens are A,
B, O, and the Rh factor.
Bilirubin—A yellow-colored end-product of hemo-
globin degradation. It is normally present at very
low levels in the bloodstream; at high levels, it pro-
duces jaundice.
Cordocentesis—A procedure for delivering a blood
transfusion to a fetus. It involves a fine needle being
threaded through a pregnant woman’s abdomen
and into the umbilical cord with the aid of ultra-
sound imaging.
Hemoglobin—A molecule in red blood cells that
transports oxygen and gives the cells their charac-
teristic color.
Hydrops fetalis—A condition in which a fetus or
newborn baby accumulates fluids, causing swollen
arms and legs and impaired breathing.
Hyperbilirubinemia—A condition in which biliru-
bin accumulates to abnormally high levels in the
bloodstream
Placenta—A protective membrane that surrounds
and protects the fetus during pregnancy.
Platelet—A blood factor that is important in form-
ing blood clots.
Rh factor—An antigen that is found on the red
blood cells of most people. If it is present, the blood
type is referred to as Rh-positive; if absent, the
blood type is Rh-negative.
is Rh-positive. If the father is Rh-positive, the mother’s
blood will be checked for antibodies against the Rh fac-
tor. A test that demonstrates no antibodies is repeated at
week 26 or 27 of the pregnancy. If antibodies are present,
treatment is begun.
In cases in which incompatibility is not identified
before birth, the baby suffers recognizable characteristic
symptoms such as anemia, hyperbilirubinemia, and
hydrops fetalis. The blood incompatibility is uncovered
through blood tests such as the Coombs test, which mea-
sures the level of maternal antibodies attached to the
baby’s red blood cells. Other blood tests reveal anemia,
abnormal blood counts, and high levels of bilirubin.