The woman being considered for Depo-Provera or
Lunelle will have a pelvic and breast examination, a Pap
test (a microscopic examination of cell samples taken
from the cervix), blood pressure check, weight check,
and a review of her medical history. Women who have
diabetes mellitus, major depression, blood clotting
problems, liver disease, or weight problems should use
these methods only under strict medical supervision.
Depo-Provera or Lunelle should not be used if the
woman is pregnant, has unexplained vaginal bleeding,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1031
Depo-Provera/Norplant
A physician inserts a contraceptive implant under the skin
of a woman’s arm. (Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by
permission.)
suffers from severe liver disease, has breast cancer, or
has a history of blood clots or stroke.
Individuals who select Norplant will receive the
same basic physical examination. If approved for this
method, a site of implantation will be selected (usually
the inside of the upper arm), and the area prepared for
minor surgery. The skin will be washed with soap and
water, and an antiseptic, such as iodine solution, will be
applied. The physician will use a local anesthetic to
numb the area, a small incision will be made, the six
Norplant capsules will be inserted, and the incision sewn
up (sutured). Protection against pregnancy normally
begins within 24 hours. If necessary, the implants can be
removed in 15–20 minutes. Norplant should not be used
by women who are pregnant, have blood clotting prob-
lems, or have unexplained vaginal bleeding. Advantages
include light periods with less cramping and decreased
anemia. This form of birth control may also be protective
against endometrial cancer.
Because Depo-Provera and Norplant use only the
hormone progestin, they may provide an alternative for
women who can not use estrogen-containing birth con-
trol pills. One benefit of Lunelle, however, is that its
effects wear off more quickly than Depo-Provera, an
important factor in the event that a woman has serious
side effects or wants to become pregnant.

None