None

Coagulation, or clotting, occurs as a complex
process involving several components of the blood. Plas-
ma, the fluid component of the blood, carries a number
of proteins and coagulation factors that regulate bleed-
ing. Platelets, small colorless fragments in the blood, ini-
tiate contraction of damaged blood vessels so that less
blood is lost. They also help plug damaged blood vessels
and work with plasma to accelerate blood clotting. A dis-
order affecting platelet production or one of the many
steps in the entire process can disrupt clotting.
Coagulation disorders arise from different causes
and produce different complications. Some common
coagulation disorders are:
• Hemophilia, or hemophilia A (Factor VIII deficiency),
an inherited coagulation disorder, affects about 20,000
Americans. This genetic disorder is carried by females
but most often affects males.
• Christmas disease, also known as hemophilia B or Fac-
tor IX deficiency, is less common than hemophilia A
with similar in symptoms.
• Disseminated intravascular coagulation disorder, also
known as consumption coagulopathy, occurs as a result
of other diseases and conditions. This disease acceler-
ates clotting, which can actually cause hemorrhage.
• Thrombocytopenia is the most common cause of
coagulation disorder. It is characterized by a lack of cir-
culating platelets in the blood. This disease also
includes idiopathic thrombocytopenia.
• Von Willebrand’s disease is a hereditary disorder with
prolonged bleeding time due to a clotting factor defi-
ciency and impaired platelet function. It is the most
common hereditary coagulation disorder.
• Hypoprothrombinemia is a congenital deficiency of
clotting factors that can lead to hemorrhage.
• Other coagulation disorders include Factor XI deficien-
cy, also known as hemophilia C, and Factor VII defi-
ciency. Hemophilia C afflicts one in 100,000 people
and is the second most common bleeding disorder
among women. Factor VII is also called serum pro-
thrombin conversion accelerator (SPCA) deficiency.
One in 500,000 people may be afflicted with this disor-
der that is often diagnosed in newborns because of
bleeding into the brain as a result of traumatic delivery.