None

Anus—The opening at the lower end of the rectum.
Colostomy—A surgical procedure in which an
opening is made in the wall of the abdomen to
allow a part of the large intestine (the colon) to
empty outside the body.
Crohn’s disease—A disease marked by inflamma-
tion of the intestines.
Defecation—Passage of stools through the anus.
Hemorrhoids—Enlarged veins in the anus or rec-
tum. They are sometimes associated with fecal
incontinence.
Rectum—The lower section of the large intestine
that holds stools before defecation.
Sphincter—A circular band of muscle that sur-
rounds and encloses an opening to the body or to
one of its hollow organs. Damage to the sphincter
surrounding the anus can cause fecal incontinence.
Stools—Undigested food and other waste that is
eliminated through the anus.
Suppository—A solid medication that slowly dis-
solves after being inserted into the rectum or other
body cavity.
people have this ability. Biofeedback training begins
with the insertion into the rectum of a balloon manome-
try device hooked up to a pressure monitor. The presence
of stools in the rectum is simulated by inflating the bal-
loon, which causes pressure changes that are recorded on
the monitor. The monitor also records sphincter contrac-
tion. By watching the monitor and following instructions
from the equipment operator, the patient gradually learns
to contract the sphincter automatically in response to
fullness in the rectum. Sometimes one training session is
enough, but often several are needed. Biofeedback is not
an appropriate treatment in all cases, however. It is used
only with patients who are highly motivated; who are
able, to some extent, to sense the presence of stools in the
rectum; and who have not lost all ability to contract the
external anal sphincter. One specialist suggests that pos-
sibly two-thirds of incontinence sufferers are candidates
for biofeedback.
Some people may require surgery. Sphincter damage
caused by childbirth is often effectively treated with
surgery, however, as are certain other kinds of inconti-
nence-related sphincter injuries. Sometimes surgical treat-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1301