None

People who have certain medical conditions or who
are taking certain other medications may have problems
if they take cholesterol-reducing drugs. Before taking
these drugs, the prescribing physician should be
informed of any of the following conditions:
ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions
to cholesterol-reducing drugs in the past should inform
the prescribing physician before taking the drugs again.
The physician should also be told about any allergies to
foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
PREGNANCY. Studies of laboratory animals have
shown that giving high doses of gemfibrozil during
pregnancy increases the risk of birth defects and other
problems, including death of the unborn baby. The
effects of this drug have not been studied in pregnant
women. Women who are pregnant or who may become
pregnant should check with their physicians before
using gemfibrozil.
Cholesterol-reducing drugs in the group known as
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (such as lovastatin, flu-
vastatin, pravastatin and simvastatin) should not be taken
by women who are pregnant or who plan to become
pregnant soon. By blocking the production of choles-
terol, these drugs prevent a fetus from developing proper-
ly. Women who are able to bear children should use an
effective birth control method while taking these drugs.
Any woman who becomes pregnant while taking these
drugs should check with her physician immediately.
Cholestyramine and colestipol will not directly harm
an unborn baby, because these drugs are not taken into
the body. However, the drugs may keep the mother’s
body from absorbing vitamins that she and the baby
need. Pregnant women who take these drugs should ask
their physicians whether they need to take extra vitamins.
BREASTFEEDING. Because cholestyramine and cole-
stipol interfere with the absorption of vitamins, women
who use these drugs while breastfeeding should ask their
physicians if they need to take extra vitamins.
Women who are breastfeeding should talk to their
physicians before using gemfibrozil. Whether this drug
passes into breast milk is not known. But because animal
studies suggest that it may increase the risk of some
types of cancer, women should carefully consider the
safety of using it while breastfeeding.
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (such as lovastatin,
pravastatin, fluvastatin and simvastatin) should not be
used by women who are breastfeeding their babies.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Cholesterol-reduc-
ing drugs may make some medical problems worse.
Before using these drugs, people with any of these med-
ical conditions should make sure their physicians are
aware of their conditions:
• stomach problems, including stomach ulcer
• constipation
• hemorrhoids
• gallstones or gallbladder disease
• bleeding problems
• underactive thyroid
• heart or blood vessel disease
In addition, people with kidney or liver disease may
be more likely to have blood problems or other side
effects when they take certain cholesterol-reducing
drugs. And some drugs of this type may actually raise
cholesterol levels in people with liver disease.
Patients with any of the following medical condi-
tions may develop problems that could lead to kidney
failure if they take HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors:
• treatments to prevent rejection after an organ transplant
• recent major surgery
• seizures (convulsions) that are not well controlled
People with phenylketonuria (PKU) should be
aware that sugar-free formulations of some cholesterol-
reducing drugs contain phenylalanine in aspartame. This
ingredient can cause problems in people who have
phenylketonuria.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
790
Cholesterol-reducing drugs
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Cholesterol-reducing
drugs may change the effects of other medicines. Patients
should not take any other medicine that has not been pre-
scribed or approved by a physician who knows they are
taking cholesterol-reducing drugs.