None

Individually, the symptoms that define FMF are com-
mon. Fevers occur for many reasons, and nonspecific
pains in the abdomen, chest, and joints are also frequent
ailments. Several infections can result in symptoms simi-
lar to FMF (Mallaret meningitis, for instance), and many
people with FMF undergo exploratory abdominal surgery
and ineffective treatments before they are finally diag-
nosed. Membership in a less commonly affected ethnic
group may delay or hinder the correct diagnosis.
In general, symptoms involving one or more of the
following broad groups should lead to suspicion of FMF:
Unexplained recurrent fevers, polyserositis, skin rash,
and/or joint pain; abnormal blood studies (see below);
and renal or other disease associated with amyloidosis. A
family history of FMF or its symptoms would obviously
be an important clue, but the recessive nature of FMF
means there usually is no family history. The diagnosis
may be confirmed when a person with unexplained fever
and pain responds to treatment with colchicine since
colchicine is not known to have a beneficial effect on any
other condition similar to FMF. Abnormal results on a
blood test typically include leukocytosis (elevated num-
ber of neutrophils in the blood), an increased erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate (rate at which red blood cells
form a sediment in a blood sample), and increased levels
of proteins associated with inflammation (called acute
phase reactants) such as SAA.
Direct analysis of the MEFV gene for FMF muta-
tions is the only method to be certain of the diagnosis.
However, it is not yet possible to detect all MEFV gene
mutations that might cause FMF. Thus, if DNA analysis
is negative, clinical methods must be relied upon. If both
members of a couple were proven to be FMF carriers
through genetic testing, highly accurate prenatal diagno-
sis would be available in any subsequent pregnancy.
Similar syndromes of periodic fever and inflamma-
tion include familial Hibernian fever and hyperim-
munoglobulinemia D syndrome, but both are more rare
than FMF.