When a c-section becomes necessary, the mother is
prepped for surgery. A catheter is inserted into her blad-
der and an intravenous (IV) line is inserted into her arm.
Leads for monitoring the mother’s heart rate, rhythm,
and blood pressure are attached. In the operating room,
the mother is given anesthesia—usually a regional anes-
thetic (epidural or spinal), making her numb from below
her breasts to her toes. In some cases, a general anesthet-
ic will be administered. Surgical drapes are placed over
the body, except the head; these drapes block the direct
view of the procedure.
The abdomen is washed with an anti-bacterial solu-
tion and a portion of the pubic hair may be shaved. The
first incision opens the abdomen. Infrequently, it will be
vertical from just below the navel to the top of the pubic
bone, or more commonly, it will be a horizontal incision
across and above the pubic bone (informally called a
“bikini cut”).
The second incision opens the uterus. In most cases
a transverse incision is made. This is the favored type
because it heals well and makes it possible for a woman
to attempt a vaginal delivery in the future. The classical
incision is vertical. Because it provides a larger opening
than a low transverse incision, it is used in the most criti-
cal situations, such as placenta previa. However, the clas-
sical incision causes more bleeding, a greater risk of
abdominal infection, and a weaker scar, so the low trans-
verse incision is preferred.
Once the uterus is opened, the amniotic sac is rup-
tured and the baby is delivered. The time from the initial
incision to birth is typically five minutes.
Once the umbilical cord is clamped and cut, the new-
born is evaluated. The placenta is removed from the
mother, and her uterus and abdomen are stitched closed
(surgical staples may be used instead in closing the outer-
most layer of the abdominal incision). From birth through
suturing may take 30–40 minutes. Thus the entire surgical
procedure may be performed in less than one hour.

None