None

Adrenal gland—A pair of organs located above the
kidneys. The outer tissue of the gland produces the
hormones epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepi-
nephrine, while the inner tissue produces several
steroid hormones.
Amphotericin B (Fengizone)—An antifungal med-
ication, prescribed for topical or systemic use in
treating fungal infections.
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the
immune system in response to a specific foreign
protein or particle called an antigen.
Antigen—A foreign protein or particle capable of
eliciting an immune response.
Asymptomatic—Persons who carry a disease but
who do not exhibit symptoms of the disease are
said to be asymptomatic.
Biopsy—The removal of a tissue sample for diag-
nostic purposes.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)—The clear fluid that sur-
rounds the spinal cord and brain and acts as a
shock absorber.
Corticosteroids—A group of hormones produced
naturally by the adrenal gland or manufactured syn-
thetically. They are often used to treat inflammation.
Examples include cortisone and prednisone.
Encephalitis—Inflammation of the brain.
Hodgkin’s disease—A disease that causes chronic
inflammation of the lymph nodes, spleen, liver and
kidneys. It is also called malignant lymphoma.
Hydrocephalus—Build-up of fluid around the brain.
Immunocompromised—A state in which the
immune system is suppressed or not functioning
properly.
India ink test—A diagnostic test used to detect the
cyptococcal organism C. neoformans. A dye, called
India ink, is added to a sample of CSF fluid, and if
the fungi is present, they will become visible as the
dye binds to the capsule surrounding the fungus.
Lumbar puncture—Also called a spinal tap, a pro-
cedure in which a thin needle is used to withdraw a
sample of cerebrospinal fluid for diagnostic purpos-
es from the area surrounding the spine.
Meningitis—Inflammation of the membranes cover-
ing the brain and spinal cord called the meninges.
Molluscum contagiosum—A disease of the skin and
mucuous membranes, caused by a poxvirus and
found all over the world.
Opportunistic infection—An infection that is nor-
mally mild in a healthy individual, but which takes
advantage of an ill person’s weakened immune sys-
tem to move into the body, grow, spread, and cause
serious illness.
Pneumonia—Inflammation of the lungs, typically
caused by a virus, bacteria, or other organism.
National Aids Clearinghouse. 800-458-5231.
National Aids Hotline. 800-342-AIDS.
Project Inform. 205 13th Street, #2001, San Francisco, CA
94103. (800) 822-7422. <http://www.projinf.org>.