Parents can take some precautions to ensure the
safety of their children. Childproofing the home, follow-
ing a recommended immunization schedule, educating
kids on safety, learning CPR, and taking kids for regular
well-child check-ups can help to protect against physical
harm. In addition, encouraging open communication
with children can help them grow both emotionally and
socially. Providing a loving and supportive home envi-
ronment can help to nurture an emotionally healthy child
who is independent, self-confident, socially skilled,
insightful, and empathetic towards others.
Because they are still developing motor skills, kids
can be particularly accident prone. Observe the following
safety rules to protect children from injury:
• Helmets and padding. Children should always wear a
properly fitted helmet and appropriate protective gear
when riding a bike, scooter, or similar equipment or
participating in sports. They should also ride on desig-
nated bike paths whenever possible, and learn bicycle
safety rules (i.e., ride with traffic, use hand signals).
• Playground safety. Swing sets and other outdoor play
equipment should be well-maintained have at least 12
in (30 cm) of loose fill materials (e.g., sand, wood
chips) underneath to cushion falls, and children should
always be properly supervised at play.
• Stay apprised of recalls. Children’s toys, play equip-
ment, and care products are frequently involved in
product recalls. The U.S. Consumer Safety Products
Commission (CSPC) is the agency responsible for
tracking these recalls (see Resources below).
• Stay safe in the car. Up to 85% of children’s car seats
are improperly installed and/or used. Infants should
always be in a rear-facing car seat until they are over 12
months of age and weigh more than 20 lb (9 kg). Never
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
765
Children’s health
Leading Causes Of Illness/Injury In Adolescents
Trauma (this could be anything from sports-related injuries to gunshot wounds; alcohol or other drug abuse is frequently a factor)
Mental health issues (substance abuse, depression, etc.)

None