may arise from problems with one or more
disks or vertebrae.
Osteophyte formation and other changes do not nec-
essarily lead to symptoms, but after age 50, half of the
population experiences occasional neck pain and stiff-
ness. As disks degenerate, the cervical spine becomes
less stable, and the neck is more vulnerable to injuries,
including muscle and ligament strains. Contact between
the edges of the vertebrae can also cause pain. In some
people, this pain may be referred—that is, perceived as
occurring in the head, shoulders, or chest, rather than the
neck. Other symptoms may include vertigo (a type of
dizziness) or ringing in the ears.
The neck pain and stiffness can be intermittent, as
can symptoms of radiculopathy. Radiculopathy refers to
compression on the base, or root, of nerves that lead
away from the spinal cord. Normally, these nerves fit
comfortably through spaces between the vertebrae.
These spaces are called intervertebral foramina. As the
osteophytes form, they can impinge on this area and
gradually make the fit between the vertebrae too snug.
The poor fit increases the chances that a minor inci-
dent, such as overdoing normal activities, may place
excess pressure on the nerve root, sometimes referred to
as a pinched nerve. Pressure may also accumulate as a
direct consequence of osteophyte formation. The pres-
sure on the nerve root causes severe shooting pain in the
neck, arms, shoulder, and/or upper back, depending on
which nerve roots of the cervical spine are affected. The
pain is often aggravated by movement, but in most cases,
symptoms resolve within four-six weeks.
Cervical spondylosis can cause cervical spondylitic
myelopathy through stenosis- or osteophyte-related pres-
sure on the spinal cord. Spinal stenosis is a narrowing of
the spinal canal—the area through the center of the verte-
bral column occupied by the spinal cord. Stenosis occurs
because of misaligned vertebrae and out-of-place or
degenerating disks. The problems created by spondylosis
can be exacerbated if a person has a naturally narrow
spinal canal. Pressure against the spinal cord can also be
created by osteophytes forming on the inner surface of
vertebrae and pushing against the spinal cord. Stenosis or
osteophytes can compress the spinal cord and its blood
vessels, impeding or choking off needed nutrients to the
spinal cord cells; in effect, the cells starve to death.
With the death of these cells, the functions that they
once performed are impaired. These functions may
include conveying sensory information to the brain or
transmitting the brain’s commands to voluntary muscles.
Pain is usually absent, but a person may experience leg
numbness and an inability to make the legs move proper-
ly. Other symptoms can include clumsiness and weakness
in the hands, stiffness and weakness in the legs, and spon-
taneous twitches in the legs. A person’s ability to walk is
affected, and a wide-legged, shuffling gait is sometimes
adopted to compensate for the lack of sensation in the
legs and the accompanying, realistic fear of falling. In
very few cases, bladder control becomes a problem.

Symptoms