phatemia can cause paralysis, convulsions, and cardiac
arrest. These symptoms result because the phosphate,
occurring in elevated levels, complexes with free serum
calcium, resulting in hypocalcemia. Tests for heart func-
tion (an electrocardiogram) and parathyroid hormone lev-
els are used in the diagnosis of hyperphosphatemia.
Hypophosphatemia occurs if serum phosphorus falls to
2.0 mg/dL or lower. It often results from a shift of inorgan-
ic phosphate from the bloodstream to various organs and
tissues. This shift can be caused by a rise in pH (alkaliza-
tion) of the bloodstream, which can occur during hyper-
ventilation, a reaction in various disease states. A shift in
phosphate to intracellular tissues may draw calcium away
from the bloodstream via the formation of insoluble calci-
um phosphate crystals within cells, with consequent
hypocalcemia. Thus, tests for abnormalities in phosphate
metabolism also involve tests for serum calcium.
Bicarbonate metabolism involves several com-
pounds. When dietary starches, sugars, and fats are bro-
ken down for energy production, carbon dioxide is creat-
ed. Much of this carbon dioxide (CO2) spontaneously
converts to carbonic acid (H2CO3), and some of the car-
bonic acid spontaneously converts to bicarbonate
(HCO3
) plus a hydrogen ion (H
+). Eventually, almost
every molecule of carbon dioxide produced in the body,
whether in the form of carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, or
bicarbonate, must convert back to carbon dioxide in
order to leave via the lungs during normal breathing.
If one holds one’s breath, carbon dioxide cannot
escape from the lungs, but continues to be generated with-
in the body. This results in an increase in production of
carbonic acid. A portion of the carbonic acid breaks apart
(dissociates), causing an increase in hydrogen ions in the
plasma, with a resulting acidosis. Tests for serum bicar-
bonate levels are accompanied by tests for acidosis (pH
test). Conversely, when one breathes too rapidly (hyper-
ventilation), the carbon dioxide is drawn off from the
bloodstream and expelled in the breath at an increased
rate. This results in an increase in the rate of combination
of bicarbonate with hydrogen ions, resulting in alkalosis.
Acidosis and alkalosis can be produced by means other
than by altering the rate of breathing. The carbonic acid
and bicarbonate in the bloodstream minimize (or buffer)
any trend to acidosis or alkalosis. Tests for bicarbonate
are generally accompanied by tests for blood pH and pos-
sibly tests for kidney malfunction, abnormal hormone
function, or gastrointestinal disorders.

None