may be present at birth or delayed until early
childhood.
Soon after closure of the neural tube, the brain
divides into two halves, or hemispheres. Failure of divi-
sion is termed holoprosencephaly (literally “whole
forebrain”). Holoprosencephaly is almost always
accompanied by facial and cranial deformities along the
midline, including cleft lip, cleft palate, fused eye sock-
ets and a single eye (cyclopia), and deformities of the
limbs, heart, gastrointestinal tract, and other internal
organs. Most infants are either stillborn or die soon
after birth. Survivors suffer from severe neurological
impairments.
The normal ridges and valleys of the mature brain
are formed after cells from the inside of the developing
brain migrate to the outside and multiply. When these
cells fail to migrate, the surface remains smooth, a con-
dition called lissencephaly (“smooth brain”). Lissen-
cephaly is often associated with facial abnormalities
including a small jaw, a high forehead, a short nose, and
low-set ears.
If damaged during growth, especially within the
first 20 weeks, brain tissue may stop growing, while
tissue around it continues to form. This causes an
abnormal cleft or groove to appear on the surface of
the brain, called schizencephaly (literally “split
brain”). This cleft should not be confused with the nor-
mal wrinkled brain surface, nor should the name be
mistaken for schizophrenia, a mental disorder. Gener-
alized destruction of tissue or lack of brain develop-
ment may lead to hydranencephaly, in which cere-
brospinal fluid fills much of the space normally occu-
pied by the brain. Hydranencephaly is distinct from
hydrocephalus, in which CSF accumulates within a
normally-formed brain, putting pressure on it and pos-
sibly causing skull expansion.
Excessive brain size is termed megalencephaly (lit-
erally “big brain”). Megalencephaly is defined as any
brain size above the 98th percentile within the popula-
tion. Some cases are familial, and may be entirely
benign. Others are due to metabolic or neurologic dis-
ease. The opposite condition, microcephaly, may be
caused by failure of the brain to develop, or by intrauter-
ine infection, drug toxicity, or brain trauma.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
890

Symptoms