Adenocarcinoma—Cervical cancer that originates
in the mucus-producing cells of the inner or endo-
cervix.
Biopsy—Removal of a small sample of tissue for
examination under a microscope; used for the diag-
nosis and treatment of cervical cancer and precan-
cerous conditions.
Carcinoma in situ—Cancer that is confined to the
cells in which it originated and has not spread to
other tissues.
Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN)—Abnor-
mal cell growth on the surface of the cervix.
Cervix—Narrow, lower end of the uterus forming
the opening to the vagina.
Colposcopy—Diagnostic procedure using a hollow,
lighted tube (colposcope) to look inside the cervix
and uterus.
Conization—Cone biopsy; removal of a cone-
shaped section of tissue from the cervix for diagno-
sis or treatment.
Dysplasia—Abnormal cellular changes that may
become cancerous.
Endocervical curettage—Biopsy performed with a
curette to scrape the mucous membrane of the cer-
vical canal.
Human papilloma virus (HPV)—Virus that causes
abnormal cell growth (warts or papillomas); some
types can cause cervical cancer.
Hysterectomy—Removal of the uterus.
Interferon—Potent immune-defense protein pro-
duced by viral-infected cells; used as an anti-cancer
and anti-viral drug.
Laparoscopy—Laparoscopic pelvic lymph node
dissection; insertion of a tube through a very small
surgical incision to remove lymph nodes.
Loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP)—
Cone biopsy performed with a wire that is heated
by electrical current.
Lymph nodes—Small round glands, located
throughout the body, that filter the lymphatic fluid;
part of the body’s immune defense.
Pap test—Pap smear; removal of cervical cells to
screen for cancer.
Pelvic exenteration—Extensive surgery to remove
the uterus, ovaries, pelvic lymph nodes, part or all
of the vagina, and the bladder, rectum, and/or part
of the colon.
Squamous cells—Thin, flat cells on the surfaces of
the skin and cervix and linings of various organs.
Squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL)—Abnormal
growth of squamous cells on the surface of the
cervix.
Vaginal stenosis—Narrowing of the vagina due to a
build-up of scar tissue.
be curable. The five-year-survival rate for all cervical can-
cers combined is about 70%. The death rate from cervical
cancer continues to decline by about 2% each year.
Women over age 65 account for 40–50% of all deaths
from cervical cancer.

None