Treatment of clenched fist injuries is complicated by
several factors. One factor is the anatomical structure of
the human hand, which contains many small closed
spaces that make it easy for infection to spread and per-
sist. Another is the number of disease-causing bacteria
transmitted by human bites; at least 42 different species
have been identified. In addition, CFIs typically do not
receive immediate treatment because the patient is con-
cerned about legal consequences. The longer the delay,
the higher the chances of infection and permanent dam-
age to the hand. Patients who wait longer than 24 hours
to seek treatment or have signs of infection or damage to
the tendon, joint capsule, or bones are usually referred
immediately to a doctor who specializes in hand surgery.
The first step in treatment of clenched fist injury is irri-
gation, a procedure by which the wound is flushed with a
stream of water under high pressure or with an antiseptic
solution. Incision and drainage of the wound (I&D) may be
required as well as debridement, the surgical removal of
dead tissue and foreign objects from a wound. Careful
examination of the depth of the wound is essential to prop-
er treatment. The surgeon may need to enlarge the sides of
the wound in order to make an accurate evaluation. The
patient will be asked to move the affected joint through its
full range of motion so that the surgeon can determine
whether the tendon or joint capsule has been damaged. Fol-
lowing these procedures, the surgeon will pack the wound
and put the hand in a splint. Bite wounds are never sutured
(sewn shut) because of the possibility of enclosing bacteria
inside the injury. After 24 hours, the packing will be
removed and the hand reexamined for signs of infection.
If the wound has become infected, the patient is usu-
ally hospitalized and given parenteral (injectable) antibi-
otics. The wound is irrigated and examined to determine
the extent of the injury. Cultures are taken for both aerobic
(requiring air or oxygen to live) and anaerobic (not requir-
ing air or oxygen) species of bacteria. The cultures should
be taken from areas deep in the wound rather than from
the surface for greater accuracy. Tetanus toxoid should be
given if the patient has not been immunized within the last
10 years. The patient should also receive treatment and
follow-up for the rare possibility of HIV and hepatitis
transmission. Although no well-documented cases of HIV
transmission by human bites exist as of 2001, the potential
for transmission by this route is still present.

None