None

For cataracts that cause no symptoms or only minor
visual changes, no treatment may be necessary. Continued
monitoring and assessment of the cataract is needed by an
ophthalmologist or optometrist at scheduled office visits.
Increased strength in prescription eyeglasses or contact
lenses may be helpful. This may be all that is required if
the cataract does not reduce the patient’s quality of life.
Cataract surgery—the only option for patients whose
cataracts interfere with vision to the extent of affecting
their daily lives—is the most frequently performed surgery
in the United States. It generally improves vision in over
90% of patients. Some people have heard that a cataract
should be “ripe” before being removed. A “ripe” or mature
cataract is when the lens is completely opaque. Most
cataracts are removed before they reach that stage. Some-
times cataracts need to be removed so that the doctor can
examine the back of the eye more carefully. This is impor-
tant in patients with diseases that may affect the eye. If
cataracts are present in both eyes, only one eye at a time
should be operated on. Healing occurs in the first eye
before the second cataract is removed, sometimes as early
as the following week. A final eyeglass prescription is usu-
ally given about four to six weeks after surgery. Patients
will still need reading glasses. The overall health of the
patient needs to be considered in making the decision to
operate. However, age alone need not preclude effective
surgical treatment of cataracts. People in their 90s can
have successful return of vision after cataract surgery.
Surgery to remove cataracts is generally an outpa-
tient procedure. A local anesthetic is used and the proce-
dure lasts about an hour. Removal of the cloudy lens can
be done by several different procedures. The three types
of cataract surgery available are:
• Extracapsular cataract extraction. This type of cataract
extraction is the most common. The lens and the front
portion of the capsule are removed. The back part of the
capsule remains, providing strength to the eye.
• Intracapsular cataract extraction. The lens and the
entire capsule are removed. This method carries an
increased risk for detachment of the retina and swelling
after surgery. It is rarely used.
• Phacoemulsification. This type of extracapsular extrac-
tion needs a very small incision, resulting in faster heal-
ing. Ultrasonic vibration is applied to the lens to break
it up into very small pieces which are then aspirated out
of the eye with suction by the ophthalmologist.
A replacement lens is usually inserted at the time of
the surgery. A plastic artificial lens called an intraocular
lens (IOL) is placed in the remaining posterior lens cap-
sule of the eye. When the intracapsular extraction
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
674