brain, premature birth, and brain injuries that occur in the first few years of life. Advances in the medical care of premature infants in the last 20 years have dramatically increased the rate of survival of these fragile newborns. However, as gesta- tional age at delivery and birth weight of a baby decrease, the risk for CP dramatically increases. A term pregnancy is delivered at 37–41 weeks gestation. The risk for CP in a preterm infant (32–37 weeks) is increased about five-fold over the risk for an infant born at term. Survivors of extremely preterm births (less than 28 weeks) face as much as a 50-fold increase in risk. About 50% of all cases of CP now being diagnosed are in children who were born prematurely. Two factors are involved in the risk for CP associat- ed with prematurity. First, premature babies are at high- er risk for various CP-associated medical complications, such as intracerebral hemorrhage, infection, and difficul- ty in breathing, to name a few. Second, the onset of pre- mature labor may be induced, in part, by complications that have already caused neurologic damage in the fetus. A combination of both factors almost certainly plays a role in some cases of CP. The tendency toward premature delivery runs in families, but the genetic mechanisms are far from clear. An increase in multiple pregnancies in recent years, especially in the United States, is blamed on the increased use of fertility drugs. As the number of fetuses in a pregnancy increases, the risks for abnormal develop- ment and premature delivery also increase. Children from twin pregnancies have four times the risk of devel- oping CP as children from singleton pregnancies, owing to the fact that more twin pregnancies are delivered pre- maturely. The risk for CP in a child of triplets is up to 18 times greater. Furthermore, recent evidence suggests that a baby from a pregnancy in which its twin died before birth is at increased risk for CP. Approximately 500,000 children and adults in the United States have CP, and it is newly diagnosed in about 6,000 infants and young children each year. The inci- GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 701 None