None

Aminocentesis—A procedure in which a needle is
inserted through a pregnant woman’s abdomen and
into her uterus to withdraw a small sample of amni-
otic fluid. The amniotic fluid can be examined for
signs of disease or other problems afflicting the fetus.
Chorionic villus sampling—A medical test that is
best done during weeks 10–12 of a pregnancy. The
procedure involves inserting a needle into the pla-
centa and withdrawing a small amount of the chori-
onic membrane for analysis.
Chromosome—A structure composed of deoxyri-
bonucleic acid (DNA) contained within a cell’s
nucleus (center) in where genetic information is
stored. Human have 23 pairs of chromosomes, each
of which has recognizable characteristics (such as
length and staining patterns) that allow individual
chromosomes to be identified. Identification is
assigned by number (1–22) or letter (X or Y).
Karyotyping—A laboratory test used to study an
individual’s chromosome make-up. Chromosomes
are separated from cells, stained, and arranged in
order from largest to smallest so that their number
and structure can be studied under a microscope.
Maternal serum analyte screening—A medical pro-
cedure in which a pregnant woman’s blood is
drawn and analyzed for the levels of certain hor-
mones and proteins. These levels can indicate
whether there may be an abnormality in the unborn
child. This test is not a definitive indicator of a prob-
lem and is followed by more specific testing such as
amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling.
Trisomy—A condition in which a third copy of a
chromosome is inherited. Normally only two copies
should be inherited.
Ultrasound—A medical test that is also called ultra-
sonography. Sound waves are directed against inter-
nal structures in the body. As sound waves bounce
off the internal structure, they create an image on a
video screen. An ultrasound of a fetus at weeks
16–20 of a pregnancy can be used to determine
structural abnormalities.
Support Organization for Trisomy 18, 13, and Related Disor-
ders (SOFT). 2982 South Union St., Rochester, NY
14624. (800) 716-7638. <http://www.trisomy.org>.