None

Pseudomonas cepacia.) The fungus Aspergillus fumiga-
tus may infect older children and adults.
The body’s response to infection is to increase
mucus production; white blood cells fighting the infec-
tion thicken the mucus even further as they break down
and release their cell contents. These white blood cells
also provoke more inflammation, continuing the down-
ward spiral that marks untreated CF.
As mucus accumulates, it can plug up the smaller
passageways in the lungs, decreasing functional lung
volume. Getting enough air can become difficult; tired-
ness, shortness of breath, and intolerance of exercise
become more common. Because air passes obstructions
more easily during inhalation than during exhalation,
over time, air becomes trapped in the smallest chambers
of the lungs, the alveoli. As millions of alveoli gradually
expand, the chest takes on the enlarged, barrel-shaped
appearance typical of emphysema.
For unknown reasons, recurrent respiratory infec-
tions lead to “digital clubbing,” in which the last joint of
the fingers and toes becomes slightly enlarged.
SWEAT GLANDS. The CFTR protein helps to regulate
the amount of salt in sweat. People with CF have sweat
that is much saltier than normal, and measuring the salti-
ness of a person’s sweat is the most important diagnostic
test for CF. Parents may notice that their infants taste salty
when they kiss them. Excess salt loss is not usually a prob-
lem except during prolonged exercise or heat. While most
older children and adults with CF compensate for this
extra salt loss by eating more salty foods, infants and
young children are in danger of suffering its effects (such
as heat prostration), especially during summer. Heat pros-
tration is marked by lethargy, weakness, and loss of
appetite, and should be treated as an emergency condition.
FERTILITY. Ninety-eight percent of men with CF are
sterile, due to complete obstruction or absence of the vas
deferens, the tube carrying sperm out of the testes. While
boys and men with CF form normal sperm and have nor-
mal levels of sex hormones, sperm are unable to leave the
testes, and fertilization is not possible. Most women with
CF are fertile, though they often have more trouble get-
ting pregnant than women without CF. In both boys and
girls, puberty is often delayed, most likely due to the
effects of poor nutrition or chronic lung infection.
Women with good lung health usually have no problems
with pregnancy, while those with ongoing lung infec-
tion often do poorly.