CMT1A and 1B, HNPP, and all of the subtypes of
CMT2 have autosomal dominant inheritance. Autosomal
refers to the first 22 pairs of chromosomes that are the
same in males and females. Therefore, males and
females are affected equally in these types. In a dominant
condition, only one gene of a pair needs to have a muta-
tion in order for a person to have symptoms of the condi-
tion. Therefore, anyone who has these types has a 50%,
or one in two, chance of passing CMT on to each of their
children. This chance is the same for each pregnancy
and does not change based on previous children.
CMTX has X-linked inheritance. Since males only
have one X chromosome, they only have one copy of the
Cx32 gene. Thus, when a male has a mutation in his Cx32
gene, he will have CMT. However, females have two X
chromosomes and therefore have two copies of the Cx32
gene. If they have a mutation in one copy of their Cx32
genes, they will only have mild to moderate symptoms of
CMT that may go unnoticed. This is because their normal
copy of the Cx32 gene does make normal myelin.
Females pass on one or the other of their X chromo-
somes to their children—sons or daughters. If a woman
with a Cx32 mutation passes her normal X chromosome,
she will have an unaffected son or daughter who will not
pass CMT on to his or her children. If the woman passes
the chromosome with Cx32 mutation on she will have an
affected son or daughter, although the daughter will be
mildly affected or have no symptoms. Therefore, a woman
with a Cx32 mutation has a 50%, or a one in two, chance
of passing the mutation to her children: a son will be
affected, and a daughter may only have mild symptoms.
When males pass on an X chromosome, they have a
daughter. When they pass on a Y chromosome, they have
a son. Since the Cx32 mutation is on the X chromosome,
a man with CMTX will always pass the Cx32 mutation
on to his daughters. However, when he has a son, he
passes on the Y chromosome, and therefore the son will
not be affected. Therefore, an affected male passes the
Cx32 gene mutation on to all of his daughters, but to
none of his sons.
CMT4 has autosomal recessive inheritance. Males
and females are equally affected. In order for a person to
have CMT4, they must have a mutation in both of their
CMT-causing genes—one inherited from each parent.
The parents of an affected person are called carriers.
They have one normal copy of the gene and one copy
with a mutation. Carriers do not have symptoms of CMT.
Two carrier parents have a 25%, or one in four, chance of
passing CMT on to each of their children.
The onset of symptoms is highly variable, even
among members of the same family. Symptoms usually
progress very slowly over a person’s lifetime. The main
problems caused by CMT are weakness and loss of sen-
sation mainly in the feet and hands. The first symptoms
are usually problems with the feet such as high arches
and problems with walking and running. Tripping while
walking and sprained ankles are common. Muscle loss in
the feet and calves leads to “foot drop” where the foot
does not lift high enough off the ground when walking.
Complaints of cold legs are common, as are cramps in
the legs, especially after exercise.
In many people, the fingers and hands eventually
become affected. Muscle loss in the hands can make fine
movements such as working buttons and zippers difficult.
Some patients develop tremor in the upper limbs. Loss of
sensation can cause problems such as numbness and the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
734

None