None

A case of chickenpox usually starts without warning
or with only a mild fever and a slight feeling of unwellness.
Within a few hours or days small red spots begin to appear
on the scalp, neck, or upper half of the trunk. After a further
12–24 hours the spots typically become itchy, fluid-filled
bumps called vesicles, which continue to appear in crops
for the next two to five days. In any area of skin, lesions of
a variety of stages can be seen. These blisters can spread to
cover much of the skin, and in some cases may also be
found inside the mouth, nose, ears, vagina, or rectum.
Some people develop only a few blisters, but in most cases
the number reaches 250–500. The blisters soon begin to
form scabs and fall off. Scarring usually does not occur
unless the blisters have been scratched and become infect-
ed. Occasionally a minor and temporary darkening of the
skin (called hyperpigmentation) is noticed around some
of the blisters. The degree of itchiness can range from bare-
ly noticeable to extreme. Some chickenpox sufferers also
have headaches, abdominal pain, or a fever. Full recovery
usually takes five to 10 days after the first symptoms
appear. Again, the most severe cases of the disease tend to
be found among older children and adults.
Although for most people chickenpox is no more
than a matter of a few days’ discomfort, some groups are
at risk for developing complications, the most common
of which are bacterial infections of the blisters, pneumo-
nia, dehydration, encephalitis, and hepatitis:
• Infants. Complications occur much more often among
children less than one year old than among older chil-
dren. The threat is greatest to newborns, who are more
at risk of death from chickenpox than any other group.
Under certain circumstances, children born to mothers
who contract chickenpox just prior to delivery face an
increased possibility of dangerous consequences,
including brain damage and death. If the infection
occurs during early pregnancy, there is a small (less
than 5%) risk of congenital abnormalities.
• Immunocompromised children. Children whose
immune systems have been weakened by a genetic dis-
order, disease, or medical treatment usually experience
the most severe symptoms of any group. They have the
second-highest rate of death from chickenpox.
• Adults and children 15 and older. Among this group,
the typical symptoms of chickenpox tend to strike with
greater force, and the risk of complications is much
higher than among young children.
Immediate medical help should always be sought
when anyone in these high-risk groups contracts the dis-
ease.