Three species of echinacea are useful medicinally:
Echinacea augustifolia, Echinacea purpurea, and Echi-
nacea pallida. The entire plant has numerous medicinal
properties that act synergistically to good effect. Echi-
nacea is most often used to boost the immune system and
fight infection. Research has shown that echinacea
increases production of interferon in the body. It is anti-
septic and antimicrobial, with properties that act to
increase the number of white blood cells available to
destroy bacteria and slow the spread of infection. As a
depurative, the herbal extract cleanses and purifies the
bloodstream, and has been used effectively to treat boils.
Echinacea is vulnerary, promoting wound healing through
the action of a chemical substance in the root known as
caffeic acid glycoside. As an alterative and an immuno-
modulator, echinacea acts gradually to promote beneficial
change in the entire system. It has also been used to treat
urinary infection and Candida albicans infections. Echi-
nacea is a febrifuge, useful in reducing fevers. It is also
useful in the treatment of hemorrhoids. A tincture, or a
strong decoction of echinacea serves as an effective
mouthwash for the treatment of pyorrhea and gingivitis.
Native American plains Indians relied on echinacea
as an all-purpose antiseptic. The Sioux tribe valued the
root as a remedy for snake bite, the Cheyenne tribe
chewed the root to quench thirst, and another tribe
washed their hands in a decoction of echinacea to
increase their tolerance of heat. European settlers learned
of the North American herb’s many uses, and soon
numerous echinacea-based remedies were commercially
available from pharmaceutical companies in the United
States. Echinacea was a popular remedy in the United
States through the 1930s. It was among many medicinal
herbs listed in the U.S. Pharmacopoeia, the official Unit-
ed States government listing of pharmaceutical raw
materials and recipes. The herb fell out of popular use in
the United States with the availability of antibiotics. In
West Germany, over 200 preparations are made from the
species E. purpurea. Commercially prepared salves, tinc-
tures, teas, and extracts are marketed using standardized
extracts. Echinacea is regaining its status in the United
States as a household medicine-chest staple in many
homes. It is one of the best-selling herbal supplements in
United States health food stores.
Clinical studies have found that the entire plant pos-
sesses medicinal properties with varying levels of effec-
tiveness. Echinacea is of particular benefit in the treatment
of upper respiratory tract infections. Some research has
shown that echinacea activates the macrophages that
destroy cancer cells and pathogens. When taken after can-
cer treatments, an extract of the root has been found to
increase the body’s production of white blood cells. Echi-
nacea has been shown to be most effective when taken at
the first sign of illness, rather than when used as a daily
preventative. Other research has demonstrated the signifi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1125

None