Breech presentation—The condition in which the
baby enters the birth canal with its buttocks or feet
first.
Cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD)—The condi-
tion in which the baby’s head is too large to fit
through the mother’s pelvis.
Classical incision—In a cesarean section, an incision
made vertically along the uterus; this kind of incision
makes a larger opening but also creates more bleed-
ing, a greater chance of infection, and a weaker scar.
Dystocia—Failure to progress in labor, either
because the cervix will not dilate (expand) further
or (after full dilation) the head does not descend
through the mother’s pelvis.
Low transverse incision—Incision made horizontal-
ly across the lower end of the uterus; this kind of
incision is preferred for less bleeding and stronger
healing.
Placenta previa—The placenta totally or partially
covers the cervix, preventing vaginal delivery.
Placental abruption—Separation of the placenta
from the uterine wall before the baby is born, cut-
ting off blood flow to the baby.
Prolapsed cord—The umbilical cord is pushed into
the vagina ahead of the baby and becomes com-
pressed, cutting off blood flow to the baby.
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)—Difficulty
breathing, found in infants with immature lungs.
Transverse presentation—The baby is laying side-
ways across the cervix instead of head first.
VBAC—Vaginal birth after cesarean.
tions may be weak or irregular, the cervix may not be
dilating, or the mother’s pelvic structure may not allow
adequate passage for birth. When the baby’s head is too
large to fit through the pelvis, the condition is called
cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD).
Another 12% of c-sections are performed to deliver
a baby in a breech presentation: buttocks or feet first.
Breech presentation is found in about 3% of all births.
In 9% of all cases, c-sections are performed in
response to fetal distress. Fetal distress refers to any situ-
ation that threatens the baby, such as the umbilical cord
getting wrapped around the baby’s neck. This may
appear on the fetal heart monitor as an abnormal heart
rate or rhythm.
The remaining 14% of c-sections are indicated by
other serious factors. One is prolapse of the umbilical
cord: the cord is pushed into the vagina ahead of the baby
and becomes compressed, cutting off blood flow to the
baby. Another is placental abruption: the placenta sepa-
rates from the uterine wall before the baby is born, cut-
ting off blood flow to the baby. The risk of this is espe-
cially high in multiple births (twins, triplets, or more). A
third factor is placenta previa: the placenta covers the
cervix partially or completely, making vaginal delivery
impossible. In some cases requiring c-section, the baby is
in a transverse position, lying horizontally across the
pelvis, perhaps with a shoulder in the birth canal.
The mother’s health may make delivery by c-section
the safer choice, especially in cases of maternal diabetes,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
725

None