is relatively short in comparison to some other
forms of psychotherapy, usually lasting no longer than 16
weeks. Many insurance plans provide reimbursement for
cognitive-behavioral therapy services. Because coverage
is dependent on the disorder or illness the therapy is treat-
ing, patients should check with their individual plans.
Rational-emotive behavior therapy
Rational-emotive behavior therapy (REBT) is a pop-
ular variation of cognitive-behavioral therapy developed
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
841
Cognitive-behavioral therapy
in 1955 by psychologist Albert Ellis. REBT is based on
the belief that a person’s past experiences shape their
belief system and thinking patterns. People form illogi-
cal, irrational thinking patterns that become the cause of
both their negative emotions and of further irrational
ideas. REBT focuses on helping patients discover these
irrational beliefs that guide their behavior and replace
them with rational beliefs and thoughts in order to relieve
their emotional distress.
There are 10 basic irrational assumptions that trigger
maladaptive emotions and behaviors:
• It is a necessity for an adult to be loved and approved of
by almost everyone for virtually everything.
• A person must be thoroughly competent, adequate, and
successful in all respects.
• Certain people are bad, wicked, or villainous and
should be punished for their sins.
• It is catastrophic when things are not going the way one
would like.
• Human unhappiness is externally caused. People have
little or no ability to control their sorrows or to rid
themselves of negative feelings.
• It is right to be terribly preoccupied with and upset
about something that may be dangerous or fearsome.
• It is easier to avoid facing many of life’s difficulties and
responsibilities than it is to undertake more rewarding
forms of self-discipline.
• The past is all-important. Because something once
strongly affected someone’s life, it should continue to
do so indefinitely.
• People and things should be different from the way they
are. It is catastrophic if perfect solutions to the grim
realities of life are not immediately found.
• Maximal human happiness can be achieved by inertia
and inaction or by passively and without commitment.
Meichenbaum’s self-instructional approach
Psychologist Donald Meichenbaum pioneered the
self-instructional, or “self-talk,” approach to cognitive-
behavioral therapy in the 1970s. This approach focuses
on changing what people say to themselves, both inter-
nally and out loud. It is based on the belief that an indi-
vidual’s actions follow directly from this self-talk. This
type of therapy emphasizes teaching patients coping
skills that they can use in a variety of situations to help
themselves. The technique used to accomplish this is
self-instructional inner dialogue, a method of talking
through a problem or situation as it occurs.

Treatment