Only recently has there been concerted public effort
to address the care of the dying in an effort to improve
their comfort and lessen their alienation from those still
living. Hospice care represents one of the greatest
ELISABETH KÜBLER-ROSS (1926– )
Contemporary physician who has become a world
authority on the subject of death and after-death states.
Born in Switzerland on July 8, 1926, she worked as a
country doctor before moving to the United States. Dur-
ing World War II she spent weekends at the Kantonspital
(Cantonai Hospital) in Zürich, where she volunteered to
assist escaped refugees. After the war she visited Maj-
danek concentration camp, where the horrors of the
death chambers stimulated in her a desire to help peo-
ple facing death and to understand the human impulses
of love and destruction. She extended her medical
background by becoming a practicing psychiatrist. Her
formal work with dying patients began in 1965 when
she was a faculty member at the University of Chicago.
She also conducted research on basic questions con-
cerning life after death at the Manhattan State Hospital,
New York. Her studies of death and dying have involved
accounts by patients who reported out-of-the-body trav-
el. Her research tends to show that while dying can be
painful, death itself is a peaceful condition. Her 1969
text, On Death and Dying, was hailed by her colleagues
and also became a popular best-seller.
In 1978 Kübler-Ross helped to found Shanti Nilaya
(Final Home of Peace), a healing and growth center in
Escondido, California. This was an extension of her
well-known “Life-Death and Transition” workshops
conducted in various parts of the United States and
Canada, involving physicians, nurses, social workers,
laypeople, and terminally ill patients. Much of Kübler-
Ross’s later research was directed toward proving the
existence of life after death. Her publication To Live
Until We Say Good-bye (1979) was both praised as a
“celebration of life” and criticized as “prettifying” the
real situation. She has also dealt with issues such as
AIDS and “near death” experiences. In the mid-1980s
Shanti Nilaya moved from San Diego County, Califor-
nia, to Head Waters, Virginia, where it continues to offer
courses and short- and long-term therapeutic sessions.
advances made in this direction. There has also been a
liberalization of the use of narcotics and other drugs for
symptomatic relief and improvement in the quality of life
for the dying.

None