None

cysteine (Mucomyst) has been used as a mucolytic for
many years but is not prescribe frequently now, while
DNase (Pulmozyme) is a newer product gaining in popu-
larity. DNase breaks down the DNA from dead white
blood cells and bacteria found in thick mucus.
People with CF may pick up bacteria from other CF
patients. This is especially true of Burkholderia cepacia,
which is not usually found in people without CF. While
the ideal recommendation from a health standpoint might
be to avoid contact with others who have CF, this is not
usually practical (since CF clinics are a major site of care),
nor does it meet the psychological and social needs of
many people with CF. At a minimum, CF centers recom-
mend avoiding prolonged close contact between people
with CF, and scrupulous hygiene, including frequent hand
washing. Some CF clinics schedule appointments on dif-
ferent days for those with and without B. cepacia colonies.
Some doctors choose to prescribe antibiotics only dur-
ing infection, while others prefer long-term antibiotic treat-
ment against S. aureus. The choice of antibiotic depends on
the particular organism or organisms found. Some antibi-
otics are given as aerosols directly into the lungs. Antibiotic
treatment may be prolonged and aggressive.
Supplemental oxygen may be needed as lung dis-
ease progresses. Respiratory failure may develop,
requiring temporary use of a ventilator to perform the
work of breathing.
Lung transplantation has become increasingly
common for people with CF, although the number of
people who receive them is still much lower than those
who want them. Transplantation is not a cure, however,
and has been likened to trading one disease for another.
Long-term immunosuppression is required, increasing
the likelihood of other types of infection. About 50% of
adults and more than 80% of children who receive lung
transplants live longer than two years. Liver transplants
are also done for CF patients whose livers have been
damaged by fibrosis.
Long-term use of ibuprofen has been shown to help
some people with CF, presumably by reducing inflam-
mation in the lungs. Close medical supervision is neces-
sary, however, since the effective dose is high and not
everyone benefits. Ibuprofen at the required doses inter-
feres with kidney function, and together with aminogly-
coside antibiotics, may cause kidney failure.
A number of experimental treatments are currently
the subject of much research. Some evidence indicates
that aminoglycoside antibiotics may help overcome the
genetic defect in some CF mutations, allowing the pro-
tein to be made normally. While promising, these results
would apply to only about 5% of those with CF.
Gene therapy is currently the most ambitious
approach to curing CF. In this set of techniques, non-
defective copies of the CFTR gene are delivered to
affected cells, where they are taken up and used to create
the CFTR protein. While elegant and simple in theory,
gene therapy has met with a large number of difficulties
in trials so far, including immune resistance, very short
duration of the introduced gene, and inadequately wide-
spread delivery.