Anatomic—Related to the physical structure of an
organ or organism.
Metabolic—Refers to the chemical processes of an
organ or organism.
Neuron—The cells within the body which make
up the nervous system, specifically those along
which information travels.
Physiological—Pertaining to the functioning of an
organ, as governed by the interactions between its
physical and chemical conditions.
Psychological—Pertaining to the mind, its mental
processes, and its emotional makeup.
Stimulus/stimuli—Action or actions performed
on an individual which predictably provoke(s) a
reaction.
mate outcome of the coma. The Glasgow Coma Scale
assigns a different number of points for exam results in
three different categories: opening the eyes, verbal
response (using words or voice to respond), and motor
response (moving a part of the body). Fifteen is the
largest possible number of total points, indicating the
highest level of functioning. The highest level of func-
tioning would be demonstrated by an individual who
spontaneously opens his/her eyes, gives appropriate
answers to questions about his/her situation, and can
carry out a command (such as “move your leg” or “nod
your head”). Three is the least possible number of total
points and would be given to a patient for whom not even
a painful stimulus is sufficient to provoke a response. In
the middle are those patients who may be able to
respond, but who require an intense or painful stimulus,
and whose response may demonstrate some degree of
brain malfunctioning (such as a person whose only
response to pain in a limb is to bend that limb in toward
the body). When performed as part of the admission
examination, a Glasgow score of three to five points
often suggests that the patient has likely suffered fatal
brain damage, while eight or more points indicates that
the patient’s chances for recovery are good. Expansion of
the pupils and respiratory pattern are also important.
Metabolic causes of coma are diagnosed from blood
work and urinalysis to evaluate blood chemistry, drug
screen, and blood cell abnormalities that may indicate
infection. Anatomic causes of coma are diagnosed from
computed tomography scans (CT) or magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) scans.

None