needle into a vein and is relatively painless. Blood tests can be either spe- cific or non-specific. Often times, in certain cancers, the cancer cells release particular proteins (called tumor markers) and blood tests can be used to detect the pres- ence of these tumor markers. However, with a few excep- tions, tumor markers are not used for routine screening of cancers, because several non-cancerous conditions also produce positive results. Blood tests are generally more useful in monitoring the effectiveness of the treat- ment, or in following the course of the disease and detecting recurrent disease. Imaging tests such as computed tomography scans (CT scans), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), ultra- sound and fiberoptic scope examinations help the doctors determine the location of the tumor even if it is deep within the body. Conventional x rays are often used for initial evaluation, because they are relatively cheap, pain- less and easily accessible. In order to increase the infor- mation obtained from a conventional x ray, air or a dye (such as barium or iodine) may be used as a contrast medium to outline or highlight parts of the body. The most definitive diagnostic test is the biopsy, wherein a piece of tissue is surgically removed for micro- scope examination. Besides confirming a cancer, the biopsy also provides information about the type of can- cer, the stage it has reached, the aggressiveness of the cancer and the extent of its spread. Since a biopsy pro- vides the most accurate analysis, it is considered the gold standard of diagnostic tests. Screening examinations conducted regularly by healthcare professionals can result in the detection of can- cers of the breast, colon, rectum, cervix, prostate, testis, tongue, mouth, and skin at early stages, when treatment is more likely to be successful. Some of the routine screen- ing tests recommended by the ACS are sigmoidoscopy (for colorectal cancer), mammography (for breast can- cer), pap smear (for cervical cancer), and the PSA test (for prostate cancer). Self-examinations for cancers of the breast, testes, mouth, and skin can also help in detecting the tumors before the symptoms become serious. A recent revolution in molecular biology and cancer genetics has contributed a great deal to the development of several tests designed to assess one’s risk of getting cancers. These new techniques include genetic testing, where molecular probes are used to identify mutations in certain genes that have been linked to particular cancers. At present, however, there are a lot of limitations to genet- ic testing and its utility appears ambiguous, emphasizing the need to develop better strategies for early detection.