None

The theory behind cell therapy has been in existence
for several hundred years. The first recorded discussion of
the concept of cell therapy can be traced to Phillippus
Aureolus Paracelsus (1493–1541), a German-Swiss physi-
cian and alchemist who wrote in his Der grossen Wun-
dartzney (“Great Surgery Book”) in 1536 that “the heart
heals the heart, lung heals the lung, spleen heals the spleen;
like cures like.” Paracelsus and many of his contemporaries
agreed that the best way to treat an illness was to use living
tissue to restore the ailing. In 1667, at a laboratory in the
palace of Louis XIV, Jean-Baptiste Denis (1640–1704)
attempted to transfuse blood from a calf into a mentally ill
patient—and since blood transfusion is, in effect, a form
of cell therapy, this could be the first documented case of
this procedure. However, the first recorded attempt at non-
blood cellular therapy occurred in 1912 when German
physicians attempted to treat children with hypothy-
roidism, or an underactive thyroid, with thyroid cells.
In 1931, Dr. Paul Niehans (1882–1971), a Swiss
physician, became known as “the father of cell therapy”
quite by chance. After a surgical accident by a colleague,
Niehans attempted to transplant a patient’s severely dam-
aged parathyroid glands with those of a steer. When the
patient began to rapidly deteriorate before the transplant
could take place, Niehans decided to dice the steer’s
parathyroid gland into fine pieces, mix the pieces in a
saline solution, and inject them into the dying patient.
Immediately, the patient began to improve and, in fact,
lived for another 30 years.
Cell therapy is, in effect, a type of organ transplant
which has also been referred to as “live cell therapy,”
“xenotransplant therapy,” “cellular suspensions,” “glan-
dular therapy,” or “fresh cell therapy.” The procedure
involves the injection of either whole fetal xenogenic
(animal) cells (e.g., from sheep, cows, pigs, and sharks)
or cell extracts from human tissue. The latter is known as
autologous cell therapy if the cells are extracted from and
transplanted back into the same patient. Several different
types of cells can be administered simultaneously.
Just as Paracelsus’ theory of “like cures like,” the
types of cells that are administered correspond in some
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
686