Fibrinogen plays two essential roles in the body: it is
a protein called an acute-phase reactant that becomes ele-
vated with tissue inflammation or tissue destruction, and
it is also a vital part of the “common pathway” of the
coagulation process.
In order for blood to clot, fibrinogen must be con-
verted to fibrin by the action of an enzyme called throm-
bin. Fibrin molecules clump together to form long fila-
ments, which trap blood cells to form a solid clot.
The conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin is the last step
of the “coagulation cascade,” a series of reactions in the
blood triggered by tissue injury and platelet activation.
With each step in the cascade, a coagulation factor in the
blood is converted from an inactive to an active form.
The active form of the factor then activates several mole-
cules of the next factor in the series, and so on, until the
final step, when fibrinogen is converted into fibrin.
The factors involved in the coagulation cascade are
numbered I, II, and V through XIII. Factor I is fibrino-
gen, while factor II (fibrinogen’s immediate precursor) is
called prothrombin. Most of the coagulation factors are
made in the liver, which needs an adequate supply of vit-
amin K to manufacture the different clotting factors.
When fibrinogen acts as an “acute-phase reactant,” it
rises sharply during tissue inflammation or injury. When
this occurs, high fibrinogen levels may be a predictor for
an increased risk of heart or circulatory disease. Other
conditions in which fibrinogen is elevated are cancers of
the stomach, breast, or kidney, and inflammatory disor-
ders like rheumatoid arthritis.
Reduced fibrinogen levels can be found in liver dis-
ease, prostate cancer, lung disease, bone marrow
lesions, malnourishment, and certain bleeding disorders.
The low levels can be used to evaluate disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIS), a serious medical condi-
tion that develops when there is a disturbed balance
between bleeding and clotting. Other conditions related
to decreased fibrinogen levels are those in which fibrino-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1320

None