None

Although the exact cause of endometrial cancer is
unknown, it is clear that high levels of estrogen, when
not balanced by progesterone, can lead to abnormal
growth of the endometrium. Factors that increase a
woman’s risk of developing endometrial cancer are:
• Age. The risk is considerably higher in women who are
over the age of 50 and have gone through menopause.
• Obesity. Being overweight is a very strong risk factor
for this cancer. Fatty tissue can change other normal
body chemicals into estrogen, which can promote
endometrial cancer.
• Estrogen replacement therapy. Women receiving estro-
gen supplements after menopause have a 12 times high-
er risk of getting endometrial cancer if progesterone is
not taken simultaneously.
• Diabetes. Diabetics have twice the risk of getting this
cancer as nondiabetic women. It is not clear if this risk
is due to the fact that many diabetics are also obese and
hypertensive. One 1998 study found that women who
were obese and diabetic were three times more likely to
develop endometrial cancer than women who were
obese but nondiabetic. This study also found that
nonobese diabetics were not at risk of developing
endometrial cancer.
• Hypertension. High blood pressure (or hypertension)
is also considered a risk factor for uterine cancer.
• Irregular menstrual periods. During the menstrual
cycle, there is interaction between the hormones estro-
gen and progesterone. Women who do not ovulate regu-
larly are exposed to high estrogen levels for longer peri-
ods of time. If a woman does not ovulate regularly, this
delicate balance is upset and may increase her chances
of getting uterine cancer.
• Early first menstruation or late menopause. Having
the first period at a young age (the mean age of
menses is 12.16 years in African American girls and
12.88 years in caucasian girls) or going through
menopause at a late age (over age 51) seem to put
women at a slightly higher risk for developing
endometrial cancer.
• Tamoxifen. This drug, which is used to treat or prevent
breast cancer, increases a woman’s chance of develop-
ing endometrial cancer. Tamoxifen users tend to have
more advanced endometrial cancer with an associated
poorer survival rate than those who do not take the
drug. In many cases, however, the value of tamoxifen
for treating breast cancer and for preventing the cancer
from spreading far outweighs the small risk of getting
endometrial cancer.
• Family history. Some studies suggest that endometrial
cancer runs in certain families. Women with inherited
mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are at a
higher risk of developing breast, ovarian, and other
gynecologic cancers. Those with the hereditary non-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1188