None

tained during the healing process. Guidelines for return-
ing to sports activities are based on the severity of the
concussion.
A grade 1 concussion can usually be treated with
rest and continued observation alone. The person may
return to sports activities that same day, but only after
examination by a trained professional, and after all
symptoms have completely resolved. If the person sus-
tains a second concussion of any severity that same day,
he or she should not be allowed to continue contact
sports until he or she has been symptom-free, during
both rest and activity, for one week.
A person with a grade 2 concussion must discontin-
ue sports activity for the day, should be evaluated by a
trained professional, and should be observed closely
throughout the day to make sure that all symptoms have
completely cleared. Worsening of symptoms, or continu-
ation of any symptoms beyond one week, indicates the
need for a CT or MRI scan. Return to contact sports
should only occur after one week with no symptoms,
both at rest and during activity, and following examina-
tion by a physician. Following a second grade 2 concus-
sion, the person should remain symptom-free for two
weeks before resuming contact sports.
A person with a grade 3 concussion (involving any
loss of consciousness, no matter how brief) should be
examined by a medical professional either on the scene or
in an emergency room. More severe symptoms may war-
rant a CT or MRI scan, along with a thorough neurological
and physical exam. The person should be hospitalized if
any abnormalities are found or if confusion persists. Pro-
longed unconsciousness and worsening symptoms require
urgent neurosurgical evaluation or transfer to a trauma cen-
ter. Following discharge from professional care, the patient
is closely monitored for neurological symptoms which may
arise or worsen. If headaches or other symptoms worsen or
last longer than one week, a CT or MRI scan should be per-
formed. Contact sports are avoided for one week following
unconsciousness of only seconds, and for two weeks for
unconsciousness of a minute or more. A person receiving a
second grade 3 concussion should avoid contact sports for
at least a month after all symptoms have cleared, and then
only with the approval of a physician. If signs of brain
swelling or bleeding are seen on a CT or MRI scan, the ath-
lete should not return to the sport for the rest of the season,
or even indefinitely.
For someone who has sustained a concussion of any
severity, it is critically important that he or she avoid the
possibility of another blow to the head until well after all
symptoms have cleared to prevent second-impact syn-
drome. The guidelines above are designed to minimize
the risk of this syndrome.