The term chelation is from the Greek root word
“chele,” meaning “claw.” Chelating agents, most com-
monly diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), were originally
designed for industrial applications in the early 1900s. It
was not until the World War II era that the potential for
medical therapy was realized. The initial intent was to
develop antidotes to poison gas and radioactive contami-
nants. The need for widespread therapy of this nature did
not materialize, but more practical uses were found for
chelation. During the following decade, EDTA chelation
therapy became standard treatment for people suffering
from lead poisoning. Patients who had received this
treatment claimed to have other health improvements
that could not be attributed to the lead removal only.
Especially notable were comments from those who had
previously suffered from intermittent claudication and
angina. They reported suffering less pain and fatigue,
with improved endurance, after chelation therapy. These
reports stimulated further interest in the potential bene-
fits of chelation therapy for people suffering from athero-
sclerosis and coronary artery disease.
If the preparatory examination suggests that there is a
condition that could be improved by chelation therapy, and
there is no health reason why it shouldn’t be used, then the
treatment can begin. The patient is generally taken to a
comfortable treatment area, sometimes in a group loca-
tion, and an intravenous line is started. A solution of
EDTA together with vitamins and minerals tailored for
the individual patient is given. Most treatments take three
to four hours, as the infusion must be given slowly in order
to be safe. The number of recommended treatments is usu-
ally between 20 and 40. They are given one to three times
a week. Maintenance treatments can then be given at the
rate of once or twice a month. Maximum benefits are
reportedly attained after approximately three months after
a treatment series. The cost of therapy is considerable, but
it is a fraction of the cost of an expensive medical proce-
dure like cardiac bypass surgery. Intravenous vitamin C
and mercury chelation therapies are also offered.

None