None

Cancer, by definition, is a disease of the genes. A
gene is a small part of DNA, which is the master mole-
cule of the cell. Genes make “proteins,” which are the
ultimate workhorses of the cells. It is these proteins that
allow our bodies to carry out all the many processes that
permit us to breathe, think, move, etc.
Throughout people’s lives, the cells in their bodies
are growing, dividing, and replacing themselves. Many
genes produce proteins that are involved in controlling
the processes of cell growth and division. An alteration
(mutation) to the DNA molecule can disrupt the genes
and produce faulty proteins. This causes the cell to
become abnormal and lose its restraints on growth. The
abnormal cell begins to divide uncontrollably and even-
tually forms a new growth known as a “tumor” or neo-
plasm (medical term for cancer meaning “new growth”).
In a healthy individual, the immune system can rec-
ognize the neoplastic cells and destroy them before they
get a chance to divide. However, some mutant cells may
escape immune detection and survive to become tumors
or cancers.
Tumors are of two types, benign or malignant. A
benign tumor is not considered cancer. It is slow growing,
does not spread or invade surrounding tissue, and once it
is removed, it doesn’t usually recur. A malignant tumor,
on the other hand, is cancer. It invades surrounding tissue
and spreads to other parts of the body. If the cancer cells
have spread to the surrounding tissues, then, even after
the malignant tumor is removed, it generally recurs.
A majority of cancers are caused by changes in the
cell’s DNA because of damage due to the environment.
Environmental factors that are responsible for causing
the initial mutation in the DNA are called carcinogens,
and there are many types.
There are some cancers that have a genetic basis. In
other words, an individual could inherit faulty DNA from
his parents, which could predispose him to getting cancer.
While there is scientific evidence that both factors (envi-
ronmental and genetic) play a role, less than 10% of all
cancers are purely hereditary. Cancers that are known to
have a hereditary link are breast cancer, colon cancer,
ovarian cancer, and uterine cancer. Besides genes, cer-
tain physiological traits could be inherited and could con-
tribute to cancers. For example, inheriting fair skin makes
a person more likely to develop skin cancer, but only if
they also have prolonged exposure to intensive sunlight.