None

When doctors suspect infective endocarditis, they
will admit the patient to a hospital and begin treating the
infection before they even have the results of the blood
culture. Their choice of antibiotics depends on what the
most likely infecting microorganism is. Once the results
of the blood culture become available, the doctor can
adjust the medications, using specific antibiotics known
to be effective against the specific microorganism
involved.
Unfortunately, in recent years, the treatment of
endocarditis has become more complicated as a result of
antibiotic resistance. Over the past few years, especially
as antibiotics have been overprescribed, more and more
strains of bacteria have become increasingly resistant to
a wider range of antibiotics. For this reason, doctors may
need to try a few different types of antibiotics—or even a
combination of antibiotics—to successfully treat the
infection. Antibiotics are usually given for about one
month, but may need to be given for an even longer peri-
od of time if the infection is resistant to treatment.
Once the fever and the worst of the symptoms have
gone away, the patient may be able to continue antibiotic
therapy at home. During this time, the patient should
make regular visits to the health care team for further
testing and physical examination to make sure that the
antibiotic therapy is working, that it is not causing
adverse side effects, and that there are no complications
such as emboli or heart failure. The patient should alert
the health-care team to any symptoms that could indicate
serious complications: For instance, trouble breathing or
swelling in the legs could indicate congestive heart fail-
ure. Headache, joint pain, blood in the urine, or stroke
symptoms could indicate an embolus, and fever and
chills could indicate that the treatment is not working and
the infection is worsening. Finally, diarrhea, rash, itch-
ing, or joint pain may suggest a bad reaction to the
antibiotics. Anyone experiencing any of these symptoms
should alert the health care team immediately.
In some cases, surgery may be needed. These
include cases of congestive heart failure, recurring
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1184