is essential to obtaining an overview of its properties as a
flower essence. The fourth window concerns the time ori-
entation of a particular specimen regarding the daily and
seasonal cycles. Why do some flowers bloom at different
times of the day, while others, such as the evening prim-
rose, respond to the moon? The fifth window observes a
plant’s relationship to its environment. Where a plant
chooses to grow, and where it cannot survive, reveals
much about its qualities. The sixth window observes a
plant’s relationship to the Four Elements and the Four
Ethers, as FES maintains that plants exist in one of the
elemental or etheric forces in addition to their physical
life. “Elements” refers to those developed by the Greeks,
as opposed to the modern concept of “molecular building
blocks.” It seems that commonly, two elements predomi-
nate in a plant, indicating a polarity of qualities, while
two can be said to be recessive. The seventh window
relates to a plant’s relationship with the other kingdoms of
nature: mineral, animal and human, while the eighth
relates to the color and color variations of a plant. Katz
explains how the language of color tells us so much about
the “soul qualities” of a plant. The ninth window concerns
all other sensory perceptions of a plant, such as fragrance,
texture, and taste. The tenth window involves assessing
the chemical substances and properties; the eleventh stud-
ies medicinal and herbal uses, as by studying the physical
healing properties of plants, we can also understand
something of their more subtle effects on the soul. Finally,
the twelfth window involves the study of the lore, mythol-
ogy, folk wisdom, and spiritual and ritual qualities associ-
ated with a particular plant. Katz relates how in the past,
human beings were more in touch with the natural world,
and the remnants of this unconscious plant wisdom live
on in the form of folklore, mythology, and so on.
Because flower remedies operate on approximately
the same principles as homeopathy, practitioners quite
often prescribe the two therapies in conjunction with
each other. They can also be used concurrently with allo-
pathic medicine.
The system consists of 38 remedies, each for a dif-
ferent disposition. The basic theory is that if the remedy
for the correct disposition is chosen, the physical illness
resulting from the present emotional state can then be
cured. There is a rescue remedy made up of five of the
essences—cherry plum, clematis, impatiens, rock star,
and star of Bethlehem—that is recommended for the
treatment of any kind of physical or emotional shock.
Therapists recommended that rescue remedy be kept on
hand to help with all emergencies.
The 38 Bach Remedies
• agrimony: puts on a cheerful front, hides true feelings,
and worries or problems
EDWARD BACH (1886–1936)
Edward Bach was a graduate of University College
Hospital (M.B., B.S., M.R.C.S.) in England. He left his
flourishing Harley Street practice in favor of homeopa-
thy, seeking a more natural system of healing than allo-
pathic medicine. He concluded that healing should be
as simple and natural as the development of plants,
which were nourished and given healing properties by
earth, air, water, and sun.
Bach believed that he could sense the individual
healing properties of flowers by placing his hands over
the petals. His remedies were prepared by floating sum-
mer flowers in a bowl of clear stream water exposed to
sunlight for three hours.
He developed 38 remedies, one for each of the
negative states of mind suffered by human beings,
which he classified under seven group headings: fear,
uncertainty, insufficient interest in present circum-
stances, loneliness, over-sensitivity to influences and
ideas, despondency or despair, and overcare for the
welfare of others. The Bach remedies can be prescribed
for plants, animals, and other living creatures as well as
human beings.
• aspen: feelings of apprehension, dark foreboding, and
premonitions
• beech: critical, intolerant, picky
• centaury: easily comes under the influence of others,
weak willed
• cerato: unsure, no confidence in own judgement, intu-
ition, and seeks approval from others
• cherry plum: phobic, fear of being out of control, and
tension
• chestnut bud: repeats mistakes, does not learn from
experience
• chicory: self–centered, possessive, clingy, demanding,
self pity
• clematis: absent minded, dreamy, apathetic, and lack of
connection with reality
• crab apple: a “cleanser” for prudishness, self–disgust,
feeling unclean
• elm: a sense of being temporarily overwhelmed in peo-
ple who are usually capable and in control
• gentian: discouraged, doubting, despondent
• gorse: feelings of pessimism, accepting defeat
• heather: need for company, talks about self, and con-
centrates on own problems
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
1339

None