usually a family member or other caretaker, and is more
likely to be male. In 1996, 24% of the confirmed cases of
United States child abuse involved physical abuse.
A rare form of physical abuse is Munchausen syn-
drome by proxy, in which a caretaker (most often the
mother) seeks attention by making the child sick or
appear to be sick.
SEXUAL ABUSE. Charles F. Johnson defines child
sexual abuse as “any activity with a child, before the age
of legal consent, that is for the sexual gratification of an
adult or a significantly older child.” It includes, among
other things, sexual touching and penetration, persuading
a child to expose his or her sexual organs, and allowing a
child to view pornography. In most cases the child is
related to or knows the abuser, and about one in five
abusers are themselves underage. Sexual abuse was pre-
sent in 12% of the confirmed 1996 abuse cases. An esti-
mated 20–25% of females and 10–15% of males report
that they were sexually abused by age 18.
EMOTIONAL ABUSE. Emotional abuse, according to
Richard D. Krugman, “has been defined as the rejection,
ignoring, criticizing, isolation, or terrorizing of children,
all of which have the effect of eroding their self-esteem.”
Emotional abuse usually expresses itself in verbal attacks
involving rejection, scapegoating, belittlement, and so
forth. Because it often accompanies other types of abuse
and is difficult to prove, it is rarely reported, and
accounted for only 6% of the confirmed 1996 cases.
NEGLECT. Neglect—failure to satisfy a child’s basic
needs—can assume many forms. Physical neglect is the
failure (beyond the constraints imposed by poverty) to
provide adequate food, clothing, shelter, or supervision.
Emotional neglect is the failure to satisfy a child’s nor-
mal emotional needs, or behavior that damages a child’s
normal emotional and psychological development (such
as permitting drug abuse in the home). Failing to see that
a child receives proper schooling or medical care is also
considered neglect. In 1996 neglect was the finding in
52% of the confirmed abuse cases.

None