None

individual’s emotional disposition. They are even safe for
babies, children, and animals. An important aspect of
treatment with flower remedies, is that if you feel instinc-
tively that you need a particular remedy, you are encour-
aged to act on that instinct. However, it is advisable not
to continue a particular remedy once you feel you no
longer need it, and to try a different one if you feel that
progress is not being made.
The remedies are administered from a stoppered
bottle and need to be diluted. Individuals sensitive to
alcohol can apply the concentrate directly to temples,
wrists, behind the ears, or underarms. They should be
kept in a cool dark place; like this they should last indef-
initely. However, a diluted remedy should not be kept
longer than three weeks. Two drops of each diluted rem-
edy should be taken four times a day, including first
thing in the morning and last thing at night. If the rescue
remedy is being used, four drops should be used instead.
Most therapists recommend that they be taken in spring
water, but the remedy can be taken directly from the bot-
tle, if care is taken that the dropper does not touch the
tongue, as this would introduce bacteria that would spoil
the remedy.
It is not recommended that more than six or seven
Bach remedies be used at any one time. Instead, it is
preferable to divide a larger amount up into two lots to
ensure the optimum effectiveness of the remedies. No
combination, or amount of combinations of the remedies
can cause any harm, rather they become less effective.
Unlike FES, the Bach Centre does not encourage
research to “prove” that the remedies work, preferring
that people find out for themselves. They strive to keep
the use of the Bach remedies as simple as possible, and
to this end they do not keep case records. Bach warned
before he died that others would try to change his work
and make it more complicated. He was determined to
keep it simple so that anyone could use it, and that is why
he limited the system to only 38 remedies. The Centre
points out that many who have used Bach’s research as a
starting point have added other remedies to the list, even
some that Bach himself rejected.